IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14012 
 
 
IMPORTANCE OF SPORTS IN EDUCATION AND LIFE 
                                       Dr MAHAVIRSINH BANESANG DABHI 
                        bb bb bb bb BBB BBB bShir S R BHABHOR ARTS COLLEGE SINGVAD 
ABSTRACT 
When we talk about sports, we may be talking about anything from professional 
competition to after-school programs to community activities to impromptu get -togethers. All of 
these things go under the umbrella term “sports”. The setting of the school is ideal for fostering 
an environment that motivates pupils to engage in greater physical activity and to form the habit 
of maintaining a healthy lifestyle by doing so. Children of all ages can benefit from participating 
in school athletics by developing their s elf-confidence and keeping their minds active. Students 
who take part in extracurricular activities like athletics are more likely to acquire valuable life 
skills like leadership, tolerance, sharing, and team spirit, all of which contribute to a more well -
rounded education. Academics are necessary for intellectual development, which includes the 
capacity for thinking and the ability to specialize professionally in a field. For this reason, it is 
absolutely essential that the learning experiences of students  contribute to development in all 
facets of their personalities. A person who is physically robust and is in good health is the only 
type of person who can effectively combat the challenges of life. Participation in sports 
encourages development in a wide variety of admirable aspects of personality. They are quite 
beneficial for enhancing stamina and fostering self -control, loyalty, and collaboration among 
members of a team. Increasing our potential as well as our productivity is the benefit of playing 
sports. Our thoughts are refreshed when we engage in physical activity. In the field of Education, 
athletics play an important part in the whole course of study. The importance of youth sports lies 
in the fact that they contribute to the mental and physical development of young people. They 
contribute to the development of characteristics of character and instil outstanding ideals in the 
individual. The growth of one's professional life may also be aided by participation in 
competitive sports. Therefore, object ives such as good sportsmanship, cooperation, team effort, 
offering and receiving support, appreciating regular exercise, emotional control, leadership and 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14013 
 
fellowship skills, as well as the development of a positive self image, may all be aided by 
participating in sports. 
KEY WORDS: Education, Life, Development, Sports, Importance. 
INTRODUCTION 
The social phenomenon known as “sports” encompasses a wide range of physically 
active pleasures, ranging from highly competitive events to scheduled programming at schools, 
organizations, or communities, all the way down to unplanned, unstructured play. Sports may be 
seen as a social phenomenon that began in ancient Greece and has since spread around the world. 
Individuals are pitted against one another in a competitive setting in a wide variety of various 
sporting events, such as races, jumps, athletics, and so on. Singer considers athletics to be an 
example of “human activity requiring specific administration, organization, and historical 
context of regulations which establish the goal and limit the course of human conduct: it requires 
concurrence or confront and an identifiable outcome largely determined by physical skill.” 
Young men no longer compete in sports for the sole purpose of satisfying their personal sense of 
accomplishment. They profit from the government's involvement in the promotion of their 
activities and the help they provide.  
GLOBAL SIGNIFICANCE 
On a worldwide scale, the significance of taking part in contests for a wide variety of 
sports and activities is steadily growing. Numerous locations all across the world play host each 
year to tournaments for a wide range of sports and these events take place annually. Athletes and 
fans go from all over the world to participate in and watch these competitions. They do battle not 
just for the honour of their own countries, but also for the honour of the entire world. Because of 
this, it is of the highest si gnificance for an athlete to perform admirably when representing his 
nation in competition. People who earn their profession in the sports sector are sometimes 
referred to as “representatives of tranquillity” because of the role that they play in promoting 
emotions of camaraderie and collaboration throughout the world. This is due of the widespread 
impact that sports have. When competing nations have a greater interest in working together 
rather than competing against one another, there is less conflict and violence. Within the realm of 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14014 
 
sports, one may find a broad number of subgenres, one of which is known as the Physical Sports 
subgenre, Aeronautical pursuits and associated activities.  
 
 
EFFECTS OF ACTIVITIES 
Activities that involve the mind, body, and soul in addition to sports that feature snow, 
targets, and other basic categories are covered in this category. The following are some examples 
of sports that involve a significant amount of physical effort: “archery, cycling, dancing, golf, 
running, shooting, diving, weightlifting”, and many more. The words “card games, board games 
with a strategic element, competitive board games”, and so on are all examples of mind sports, 
whereas the terms “aerobatics, air racing, gliding, and hang gliding” are all examples of air 
sports each in their own right, Gliding in the air while being supported by a parachute. Not only 
is it possible to consider skydiving a “adventure sport,” but the term “adventure sport” may also 
be used to apply to a variety of other types of activities.  
The “Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), Gujarat State Education Board 
(GSEB)” and the vast majority of other state boards of education have both decided that students 
are required to take physical education classes all the way to the plus two levels. It is 
consequently quite perplexing why genuine growth has proceeded at such a glacial pace in this 
industry. Participating in sports on a regular basis is beneficial to our entire development as 
humans. The modern period has seen a rise in the phenomenon known as the “commercialization 
of sports,” which has been increasingly prevalent in recent decades. As a result of the reliability 
with which they occur, they have developed into a source of money. The enthusiastic sports fan 
that does extraordinarily well in competition is showered with acclaim and is afforded the 
opportunity to become famous and wealthy. Suddenly, everyone regards him as a hero and looks 
up to him. Participating in sports presents a great number of employment opportunities.  
As a consequence of this, we need to begin taking children seriously at an early age and 
maintain this attitude over the course of their lives. The world of sports has opportunities for 
those who want to achieve financial success. Participating in sports gives one the opportunity to 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14015 
 
exhibit their skills in front of an audience. As a direct consequence of this, sports have a 
substantial degree of importance. An increasing number of communities, both rural and semi -
urban, are investing in sports facilities. This trend can be seen in both the United States and 
Canada. In most communities, there is at least one playground available for use. Infrastructure 
for a wide variety of athletic events and activities is now being constructed in many parts of the 
world. In addition, many different athletic organizations are doing an outstanding job of 
successfully spreading information about their respective sports. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The authors of the book “raising our athletic daughters”, Zimmerman & Reavill, claim 
that the term “raising our athletic daughters” comes from their book's title. One of the most 
crucial aspects that play a role in deciding whether or not a kid will develop an interest in playing 
sports as an adult is the level of encouragement and support that they receive from their parents 
regarding their engagement in athletics. Your older child may help your younger child 
understand the necessity of maintaining an active lifestyle by teaching them how to swim, as 
well as how to toss a football or a baseball with him. This can be a great way to bond with your 
younger child while also helping your older child. If you encourage your child to take part in a 
sport of their choosing while they are of school age, there is a chance that they will continue 
playing the sport even after they start school. This is something you should consider.  
Hesburgh, who is the author of “The Importance of School Sports and Education”, 
believes that it is vital for children of this age to have the chance to participate in extracurricular 
activities such as sports and games. Hesburgh came to this conclusion after reading “The 
Importance of School Sports and Education.” It not only gives young people a sense of agency 
and boosts their confidence, but it also acts as a powerful motivation for pupils to do well in 
school and improve their academic standing. Maintaining a healthy weight, reducing the chance 
of acquiring chronic diseases, and learning the information and skills necessary to continue 
living a healthy lifestyle after graduating from high school are just a few of the countless 
physical advantages. There are a great number of other benefits as well.  
According to Duderstadt (2000), young people who participate in university athletics 
have the potential to develop attributes such as character, desire, endurance, loyalty, and personal 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14016 
 
best performance. This opportunity is provided by the fact that collegiate athletics supply them. 
This should be the case at the very least in theoretical terms. 
 
 
NUTRITIOUS DIET 
When it comes to keeping a healthy weight, dieticians will often recommend a mix of 
consuming a nutritious diet and engaging in regular physical activity. On the other hand, when it 
comes to preventing cardiovascular issues, obesity, high blood pressure, and other illnesses that 
are quite similar, medical practitioners will often stress the need of engaging in constant physical 
exercise as an essential strategy of doing so. As a method for lowering one's levels of stress, 
engaging in physical exercise is one of the most common recommendations made by medical 
specialists who specialize in mental health. Recreation Leaders have a method to waste time, 
relax, and enjoy themselves due to the availability of a large variety of sports and activities at 
their disposal. This is because of the wide number of sports and activities that are at their 
disposal. Walking, running, aerobics, weight training, and a number of other activities are 
gaining popularity across the country, particularly among younger people and those who have 
reached the middle years of their life.  
CREDIBILITY 
The credibility of this argument is bolstered not just by the ideas that were discussed 
before but also by the support of industry experts. The worrisome and considerable threat to 
public health that is presented by the growing incidence of obesity across the world, particularly 
among children and adolescents who are enrolled in elementary and secondary schools, is 
becoming increasingly apparent. The maintenance of a healthy community depends on a variety 
of factors, two of which are the pursuit of intellec tual accomplishment and the development of 
physical prowess. Students who take part in athletics develop important skills for life, including 
those related to leadership, tolerance, sharing, and the spirit of collaboration. These are all 
essential components of a well -rounded education that may be gained via participation in 
athletics. The current state of the economy is one of the key driving elements behind the choice 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14017 
 
taken by a number of educational institutions to cut the amount of financing that they offer for 
athletics. This decision was made in light of the fact that the economy is now in a terrible state.  
CURRENT EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM 
The current educational system focuses an unusually high degree of emphasis on 
intellectual development, offers moral development little more than lip service, and completely 
overlooks the student's physical well -being. The current educational system lays an excessively 
high degree of emphasis on intellectual development. This is an undeniable fact that can in no 
way be called into question, and there is no one who is capable of doing so. The end result of this 
is that a growing number of people who have graduated from colleges and universities, had 
postgraduate degrees, and are working professionals in a variety of professions are sick and 
physically unfit. To clarify, taking part in sports activities is not only significant on a level that is 
relevant to a person, but it is also significant on a level that is applicable to a nation as a whole. 
On the other hand, the fact that they have not been accorded adequate weight in our educational 
system is an exceptionally embarrassing oversight. Because of the significance, crucial necessity, 
and early introduction of sports into our lives through the channel of education, there has been 
research done on the issue of the present problem relevance of sports in education and life.  
Because of this, the research is now being carried out. This is due to the fact that 
beginning in our early youth; we were encouraged to take part in a variety of different sports. 
Therefore, it is important for us as parents, teachers, and leaders to encourage children to speak 
out about the love they have for sports, and we also need to become involved alongside children 
in the process of maintaining sports programs as a regular activity in our lives in a way that is 
constructive. So that we, as parents, teachers, and administrators, can encourage the child to talk 
about how excited they are about sports, and so that we can encourage the child to talk about 
how much they enjoy sports. 
SIGNIFICANCE OF SPORTS 
Methods That Are Utilized While Conducting Research on the Significance of Sports - 
The classroom is the perfect environment for creating in children a favourable attitude toward 
athletics and encouraging them to participate in regular physical exercise. This may be 
accomplished by providing students with regular opportunities to participate in athletics. Since it 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14018 
 
opened its doors to the public more than a decade ago, this community centre has been 
frequented by children and adolescents who come from a diverse range of cultural and financial 
backgrounds. Because education and the acquisition of new information are the fundamental 
objectives of schools, one of the most useful things that can be done is to establish the habit of 
engaging in regular physical exercise in children. This is one of the most helpful things that can 
be done. As a result of this, it is of the utmost importance that students take part in both 
academic and extracurricular activities while they are still enrolled in school. One component of 
the total value that comes from integrating sports in the curriculum is the value that it provides to 
an individual's health, which may be improved by engaging in regular physical exercise. 
It is vital that children of all ages participate in school athletics because it has the 
potential to have good impacts on a child's feeling of self -worth and mental acuity. Because of 
these potential benefits, it is imperative that children of all ages participate. Playing sports not 
only provides us with a source of fun and physical activity, but they also help us to stay fit and in 
good shape. Participating in sports helps us maintain a healthy lifestyle and a strong body. Assist 
in the formation of our personalities, provide vitality and power onto us, and enable us to 
maintain composure in the face of hope and melancholy. Playing a sport regularly is a great way 
to develop both your mind and your body at the same time. They demand us to acquire abilities 
of coping in order to get through the challenging moments that they bring. In terms of the 
development of society, it's conceivable that the spirit of competition that pervades the world of 
sports may be a positive driving factor. The individual who makes use of them is more likely to 
develop mental and physical resilience as a result of their use, which is beneficial. By increasing 
blood flow throughout the body, they make us look and feel better.  
This, in turn, decreases the effects of fatigue and a sedentary lifestyle choice, which helps 
us look better. As a direct result of this, the state of our physical health has significantly 
improved. Participation in sports has been shown to boost both a person's physical strength and 
their level of agility. Both studying and working by ourselves may be exhausting, so we often 
take breaks. Even now, we are unable to execute in any way that is even remotely acceptable. 
When we engage in physical activity, we improve our capacity to recover from mental fatigue. 
The incorporation of extracurricular activities, particularly athletics, can be extremely 
advantageous to academic performance. Participation in athletics is required for an education to 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14019 
 
be considered comprehensive and well -rounded. Early on in their academic lives, children 
participate in a number of games, each of which is intended to teach them a vital and valuable 
life skill. These games are introduced to the children by their teachers. These days, academic 
topics frequently include aspects of sports into their curricula for students to learn. 
 
VITAL COMPONENT 
At a higher level in the realm of education, sports are a vital component in the daily lives 
of young students. As contrast to our normal work or other forms of drudgery, sports are 
activities that we participate in for the purpose of having pleasure. This is common knowledge. 
On college and university campuses, athletic participation is promoted for three primary reasons. 
Participation in sports is beneficial to the development of young people. The advantages of 
participating in sports go much beyond simply enhancing one's performance in extracurricular 
activities. In conclusion, incorporating Sports is essential to the overall success of the business. 
Life is a fight along with the person possessing a strong and fit physique alone may face 
& tackle it effectively. Sports do more than only improve physical fitness; they also foster 
positive traits in one's mind and spirit. They improve the power of tolerance and foster 
regulation, fair play & team spirit. Young people who participate in sports are better equipped to 
deal with challenges in life. Young people are taught to take success and failure with grace and 
to never exalt themselves. When it comes to relieving stress and having fun, nothing beats a good 
game of sports. You'll be filled with happiness, vigour, vitality, and excitement, which will serve 
you well as you face the challenges of real life without giving in to pessimism. However, the 
lack of progress in Physical Education is also due to a shortage of skilled physical -education 
instructors (inadequacies in the effectiveness of teachers), low finances, and the emphasis placed 
upon physical-education by schools. Many people, including parents and the broader public, are 
unaware of the numerous improvements that may be made. Physical education instructors and 
those who fund and shape curricula need to improve their communication. The perception that 
sporting education is only a time for kids to blow off steam while learning basic team sports will 
persist until communication between teachers and students is enhanced. 
CONCLUSION 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14020 
 
In order to keep one's mind as well as one's body in good health, it is essential to keep 
one's body in good health. Gaining muscle and having a healthy lifestyle go hand in hand, and 
the best way to do both is to get active and play sports. Building a strong and healthy physique is 
something that must be prioritised. The appreciation of life in one's body is necessary for the 
pleasure of life in one's thoughts. If we don't take care of our bodies and keep a positive attitude, 
all of the years of experience we've gained on the job and the education we've received will be 
for naught. In addition to the extracurricular activities that students participate in, such as sports 
and games, a well -rounded education should place an emphasis on health education. It is 
imperative that both regular physical education classes and extracurricular sports be allotted a 
suitable amount of time throughout the school day. Because it is impossible for children to 
develop intellectually and morally without also developing physically, sports education has to be 
treated seriously so that it may be implemented. This is because it is difficult for children to 
develop physically without also developing academically. When compared to the robust and 
healthy student who is capable and vigilant in their studies, the sick and feeble learner who is 
merely a bookworm will inevitably lag behind in their academic pursuits throughout the course 
of their academic career. Students who have achieved a high degree of achievement in sports are 
given positive consideration throughout the entirety of the admissions process as well as 
employment interviews. Participating in sports and achieving success at the national and global 
levels of competition makes it possible for an individual to perform well in their work, become 
recognised and renowned not only in their own country but also throughout the entire globe. This 
is the case especially if the individual competes at both the national and international levels of 
competition. Athletes that are able to accomplish this feat are awarded a number of awards and 
accolades. 
REFERENCES 
1. Block, M.E. (1998). Ensuring the quality of life through activity -Americans with 
Disabilities Act: Its impact on youth sports, Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & 
Dance 66(1), 28-33.  
2. Kristi, C. (2013). Importance of Sports & Games in School, Journal of Physical 
Education, Recreation & Dance 87(3), 11-14. 
IJFANS INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FOOD AND NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
ISSN PRINT 2319 1775 Online 2320 7876 
Research paper © 2012 IJFANS. All Rights Reserved, UGC CARE Listed ( Group -I) Journal Volume 11, Iss 12, 2022 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  14021 
 
3. Shubham, (2015). The Importance of Sports in Education. Online 
availableat:http://www.shareyouressays.com/2282/474-words-essay-on-the-importance-
of-sports-in-education-free-to-read.  
4. Smith R. (1993). Sport and physical activity for people with physical disabilities Parks & 
Recreation 28(2), 21-28.  
5. Smruti, (2015). Importance of Sports and Games. Online available at: 
http://www.shareyouressays.com/543/309-words-short-essay-on-the importance -of-
sports-and-games.  
6. Stein, J., & Paciorek, M.J. (1995), Sport for all: A declaration of rights of individuals 
with disabilities: Responsibilities of program organizers Physical Educator 51(4), 188 -
193.