WHAT WE  
KNOW ABOUT 
UNIVERSAL  
BASIC INCOME
A CROSS-SYNTHESIS 
OF REVIEWS
By Rebecca Hasdell
JULY 2020

About the Stanford Basic Income Lab
The Stanford Basic Income Lab (BIL) aims to promote an informed public conversation on 
Universal Basic Income and its potential in alleviating poverty, precariousness and inequality. 
An initiative of the McCoy Family Center for Ethics in Society at Stanford, BIL fosters research 
on basic income, holds events around the politics, philosophy and economics of the proposal, 
brings together thought partners, practitioners, policymakers and academics to document 
best practices, discuss implementation challenges, and derives practical recommendations  
for advancing basic income proposals. More information is available on our website 
basicincome.stanford.edu
About the Lead Author
Rebecca Hasdell is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the Stanford Basic Income Lab.  
She holds a Masters of Public Health (Health Promotion) and PhD (Social and Behavioral 
Health Sciences) from the Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto. 
About this Report
The report was funded by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (Grant ID # 75386; 
Principal Investigator: Professor Juliana Bidadanure). The Basic Income Lab team would like to 
thank Ioana Marinescu, Assistant Professor of Public Policy at the University of Pennsylvania 
School of Social Policy and Practice, and a Faculty Research Fellow at the National Bureau of 
Economic Research, as well as Ugo Gentilini, Senior Economist with the Social Protection and 
Jobs Global Practice and the Global Lead for Social Safety Nets at the World Bank Group,  
for their thoughtful comments on this report. 
Please cite the work as follows: Hasdell, R. (2020) What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis 
of reviews. Stanford, CA: Basic Income Lab.  
2
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
There is renewed interest in universal 
basic income (UBI) as a potential policy 
response to systemic poverty and rising 
inequality as well as new challenges 
associated with technological change and 
a fundamental restructuring of the global 
economy. Despite decades of economic 
growth in high-income countries, large 
swaths of the population have been left 
behind and inequalities have deepened. 1 
In low- and middle-income countries, 
progress has been made on extreme 
poverty, but uneven progress within and 
between countries has opened new 
divides.2 There is growing anxiety about 
emerging threats from technological 
change and concurrent job shortages from 
automation, while other structural forces—
such as trade and globalization as well 
as the consolidation of large firms—have 
reduced job and economic mobility for 
some time.3 Regardless of the root cause 
for today’s inequities, there are questions 
about how effective the current patchwork 
of social transfers has been for redressing 
persistent poverty and inequalities, and 
whether systems are equipped to respond 
to societal changes.  
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY
In the last ten years, as Universal 
Basic Income has moved up the policy 
agenda, many reviews and reports 
have taken stock of the evidence 
on unconditional and universal cash 
programs. This report, "What we know 
about Universal Basic Income: A cross-
synthesis of reviews," is intended as an 
‘umbrella review’—it provides a roadmap 
to the literature for experimenters, 
policy practitioners, policymakers and 
others involved in UBI development 
and implementation.  
This report compiles and critically 
examines 16 reviews of the evidence 
in order to synthesize key findings, 
identify evidence gaps, and derive 
directions for future UBI research, 
policy and practice. 
BACKGROUND
1

3
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
Across the globe, pilots and experiments 
are underway in an attempt to understand 
how a UBI might address these public 
policy concerns. While definitions vary, at 
its core, UBI is a cash transfer given to all 
members of a community on a recurrent 
basis regardless of income level and 
with no strings attached (Figure 1).4 Many 
UBI advocates argue for a transfer that is 
sufficient to cover essential living costs, but 
quite a few propose incremental levels that 
would function as a base for other sources 
of income (Figure 1).5 A transfer of $1,000 
a month, for example, is often floated as 
a reference number in the United States. 
Several experiments that are currently in 
progress are testing varying amounts 
A fully universal and unconditional basic 
income has never been implemented 
at scale. However, evidence from 
programs, policies and experiments that 
share features of a UBI can be used to 
approximate economic, social, health and 
other impacts. There are a growing number 
of contemporary literature reviews that 
report on the substantial evidence base of 
interventions that meet at least two or more 
features of a UBI. Since the 1990s, there 
has been a proliferation of cash transfers 
in low- and middle-income countries and 
increased attention to UBI in higher-
income contexts. 
This report is structured as follows. First, it 
provides an overview of the reviews. Then 
it synthesizes the basis of evidence (e.g., 
experiments, policies, and programs) that 
has been used to arrive at conclusions about 
UBI as well as the types of outcomes that 
have been of interest to researchers and the 
evidence that exists for these outcomes. 
The final section highlights gaps in the 
current state of the evidence and where 
future research is required. 
DEFINITIONAL FEATURES OF A UBI
Universal: It is paid to every individual and 
not targeted to a specific population
Unconditional: It involves no set conditions or 
sanctions and is given to those who are both 
employed and unemployed, voluntarily or not
Cash payment: It is paid in cash, which 
allows recipients to convert their benefits 
however they choose
Individual: It is paid on an individual basis 
(versus household-based)
Periodic: It is a recurring payment rather  
than a one-off grant
FIGURE 1
4
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
WHAT DID  
WE DO?  
DESIGN OF  
THIS REPORT
WHAT IS AN ‘UMBRELLA REVIEW’
An ‘umbrella review’ (or ‘cross-synthesis  
of reviews’) compiles evidence from 
multiple review reports that search for, 
appraise, and synthesize multiple studies 
on a topic. By incorporating existing 
syntheses of research evidence, an 
umbrella reviews aims to provide a meta-
level analysis to cross identify research 
findings and gaps on a topic and highlight 
areas where the reviews may diverge. 
REPORT QUESTIONS AND METHODS 
The objective of this umbrella review is to 
summarize the current state of the evidence on 
UBI-type programs across the globe based on 
published reviews, and to provide a roadmap 
for those involved in UBI. The questions 
addressed in this umbrella review are: 
1)   What types of interventions (policies, 
programs, and experiments) have been 
used by previous reviews of the evidence 
to arrive at conclusions about UBI?
2)   What types of outcomes have been used 
to assess the effectiveness of UBI-type 
interventions? 
3)   What are the effects of UBI-type 
interventions? 
 
IDENTIFICATION OF EXISTING 
REVIEWS ON UBI AND OTHER 
CASH TRANSFERS 
A targeted search was conducted 
starting with a reference list of review 
reports from a recently published 
comprehensive report on UBI by the 
World Bank Group.6 Reference lists of 
the review reports included in the World 
Bank report were then hand searched, 
and recommendations were solicited 
from experts in the field to identify other 
relevant reviews. Any English-language 
review that set out to approximate the 
effects of a UBI was included, as well as 
reviews on social protection programs 
that focussed on unconditionality as an 
essential feature of program design and 
delivery. Reviews were also included if 
they compared unconditional transfers 
to conditional programs (those that 
require recipients to comply with certain 
criteria) when it was possible to isolate 
the evidence from unconditional 
transfers. Excluded from the analysis 
were: single studies, reviews that 
focussed exclusively on conditional or 
in-kind cash transfers, and conceptual 
reviews that did not comprehensively or 
systematically report empirical evidence. 
Data was systematically extracted from 
the reviews following the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews 
and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)7.
2
3

5
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
FEATURES OF THE INCLUDED REVIEWS 
Sixteen reviews met the inclusion criteria. 
The reviews were comprised of nine 
peer-reviewed articles and reports from 
systematic review databases, five technical 
reports, and two working papers. Table 1 
shows the reviews organized by objectives 
and geography.
All reviews were published between  
2009–2019, but they all draw on empirical 
evidence that dates back to the 1970s.  
There are two distinct types of reviews in  
the literature. The first are reviews that 
directly address questions about UBI as a 
policy proposal. The second are reviews 
that report on the impacts of unconditional 
cash, but do not directly address UBI. The 
latter preceded UBI entering mainstream 
policy discussions, but they report on similar 
types of policies, programs, and experiments 
that have been used to approximate or 
anticipate the impacts of a UBI and are 
therefore relevant for this report. 
WHAT DID  
WE FIND?   
DESCRIBING 
THE STATE OF 
THE EVIDENCE 
ON UBI-TYPE 
PROGRAMS
The literature focuses on the following 
themes and potential impacts: 
■ projected economic impacts of a UBI3,8 
■ intersecting health, social and  
economic outcomes among all  
recipients5,9,10 and based on demographic 
characteristics11–13 
■ specific outcomes for education14
■ adult6,15 and child16 labor market 
participation
■ health and health care access17 
■ reproductive health18
■ the social determinants of health19 
■ infant and early childhood health20 
By study location, eight reviews8,9,11–14,16–19 
report on outcomes from countries defined 
as low- and middle-income by the World 
Bank, three in high-income countries3,5,10, 
and two across country contexts.6,20
Other than two meta-analyses, which 
combined data from multiple studies to arrive 
at common effects15,17, all studies utilized 
systematic or narrative synthesis strategies. 
Other than a handful of reviews that included 
results from qualitative studies, almost 
all of the knowledge syntheses reviewed 
had inclusion criteria that was limited to 
experimental and quasi-experimental 
designs.10,12,19
3
6
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
AUTHORS  YEAR PRIMARY OBJECTIVE(S) N REVIEW 
TYPE
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS  
AND COVERAGE 
OF STUDIES
RESEARCH 
DESIGNS
UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME REVIEWS
Banerjee, A.,  
Niehaus, P., Suri, T.
2019 Assess what recipients 
would likely do with 
incremental income and 
the extent to which basic 
income unlocks further 
economic growth
N/R Narrative 
review
Low- and middle-
income countries
N/R
Bastagli, F.  
(in Gentilini et al., eds)*
2020 Examine the evidence 
for UBI related to labor 
effects with an emphasis 
on how design features 
impact work outcomes
N/R Systematic 
review 
Low- and middle-
income countries
N/R
Gibson, M., Hearty, W., 
Craig, P.
2019 Describe the nature of 
interventions evaluated in 
previous studies and the 
study designs to evaluate 
them, including data 
sources and outcome 
measures 
28 Scoping 
review
Low-, middle-, and 
high-income countries
Experimental, 
quasi-
experimental 
and qualitative 
studies 
Hoynes, H., Rothstein, J. 2019 Review evidence on how 
UBI should be defined 
and the impacts it intends 
to address, and the 
evidence for programs 
that meet definitions 
of either universality or 
minimum payments
N/R Narrative 
review
United States and 
advanced economies
N/R
Marinescu, I. 2018 Explore the impact of 
unconditional cash 
transfers in three major 
natural experiments on 
consumption, labor force 
participation, education, 
health and other social 
outcomes. 
N/R Systematic 
review
United States,  
Canada, Sweden
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental 
Owusu-Addo, E., 
Renzaho, A.M.N., 
Smith, B.J.
2019 Synthesize qualitative 
and quantitative evidence 
on the contribution 
of cash transfers in 
addressing the wider 
social determinants of 
health, and the effect 
on health and health 
inequalities
53 Systematic 
review
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Malawi (13%), Uganda 
(13%), Zambia (13%), 
Kenya (8%), South 
Africa (8%), Tanzania 
(8%), Zimbabwe (8%), 
Burkina Faso (4%), 
Congo (4%), Ghana 
(4%), Lesotho (4%), 
Mozambique (4%),  
Niger (4%), Nigeria (4%)
Experimental, 
quasi-
experimental 
and qualitative 
TABLE 1 SUMMARY OF REVIEW REPORTS ON UNCONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFERS, 2009–2019
7
AUTHORS  YEAR PRIMARY OBJECTIVE(S) N REVIEW 
TYPE
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS  
AND COVERAGE 
OF STUDIES
RESEARCH 
DESIGNS
UNCONDITONAL CASH TRANSFER REVIEWS  
Baird, S., Ferreira, 
F.H.G., Ozler, B., 
Woolcock, M.
2013 Assess the relative 
effectiveness of 
conditional and 
unconditional cash 
transfers in improving 
enrollment, attendance, 
and test scores in 
developing countries
75 Meta- 
analysis
Low- and middle- 
income countries
Experimental 
(35) and quasi-
experimental 
(40)
Baird, S.,  
McKenzie, D.,  
Ozler, B.
2018 Examine impacts on 
the adult labor market 
of a wide range of cash 
transfer programs
N/R Narrative 
review
Low-, middle- and 
high-income countries
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental
Banks, L., Mearkle, 
R., Mactaggart, I., 
Walsham, M., Kuper, 
H., Blanchet, K.
2016 Examine the financial and 
non-financial impacts for 
persons with disabilities 
who participate in social 
protection programs, 
and the extent to which 
programs are disability 
inclusive
15 Systematic 
review
Low- and middle-
income countries
South Africa (53%), 
Vietnam (20%), China 
(13%), Namibia (6%)
Experimental, 
quasi-
experimental 
and qualitative
Bastagli, F., Hagen-
Zanker, J., Harman, L., 
Barca, V., Sturge, G., 
Pellerano, L.
2016 Examine the evidence 
for the impact of cash 
transfers on a range of 
individual- or household-
level outcomes and 
the links between 
outcomes and variations 
in program design and 
implementation, with a 
specific focus on women 
and girls
201 Systematic 
review
Low- and middle-
income countries 
Latin America (54%), 
sub-Saharan Africa 
(38%), East Asia and 
the Pacific, Europe 
and Central Asia, and 
the Middle East and 
North Africa (8%)
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental 
(intervention 
outcomes) and 
institutional 
and 
descriptive 
analysis 
(program 
design)
de Hoop, J.,  
Rosati, F.C.
2014 Evaluate the impact 
of unconditional cash 
transfers on children’s 
labor market participation 
and heterogeneity 
of effects across 
demographic categories
30 Systematic 
review
Low- and middle-
income countries
Latin America (77%), 
Mexico (17%), Malawi 
and South Africa (7%)
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental
(Continued)
TABLE 1 SUMMARY OF REVIEW REPORTS ON UNCONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFERS, 2009–2019
8
AUTHORS  YEAR PRIMARY OBJECTIVE(S) N REVIEW 
TYPE
GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS  
AND COVERAGE 
OF STUDIES
RESEARCH 
DESIGNS
UNCONDITONAL CASH TRANSFER REVIEWS 
Hagen-Zanker, J., 
McCord, A.,  
Holmes, R.
2011 Assess the evidence of 
the impact of employment 
guarantee schemes on 
the poor compared with 
cash transfers
44 Systematic 
review
Low- and middle-
income countries, and 
the USA (employment 
guarantee schemes 
from the 1930s)
All study types
Khan, M.E., Hazra, A., 
Kant, A., Ali, M.
2016 Measure the effect of 
conditional cash transfers 
and unconditional cash 
transfers on outcomes 
related to contraceptive 
use and reproductive 
health
10 Systematic 
review 
Low- and middle-
income countries
Studies covered 
Honduras, Malawi, 
Medico, Nicaragua, 
South Africa and 
Zambia
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental 
Pega, F., Liu S.Y., 
Walter, S., Pabayo, R., 
Saith, R., Lhachimi S.K.
2017 Assess the effects of 
unconditional cash 
transfers for improving 
health services use and 
outcomes in vulnerable 
children and adults in 
LMICs, and to assess 
the effects of UCTs on 
social determinants of 
health and healthcare 
expenditure. 
21 Meta- 
analysis 
was 
conducted  
for cluster 
RCTs
Systematic 
review of 
non-RCTs
Low- and middle-
income countries
Studies covered 
Ecuador, Burkina 
Faso, Kenya, Malawi, 
Indonesia, Lesotho, 
Mexico, South Africa, 
Uruguay, Zambia, India 
and Zimbabwe
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental 
Siddiqi, A., Rajaram, A., 
Miller, S.P.
2018 Synthesize the current 
body of research from 
around the world on the 
effects of cash transfer 
programs on the first year 
of life
14 Systematic 
review
Low-, middle- and 
high-income countries
USA (57%), Canada 
(14%), Mexico (14%), 
Brazil (7%), Nepal (7%)
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental
Y oong, J., Rabinovich, 
L., Diepeveen, S.
2012 Examine the evidence 
of the impact on family 
well-being of giving 
economic resources to 
women relative to the 
impact of giving them  
to men
14 Narrative 
review
Low- and middle-
income countries
Experimental 
and quasi-
experimental 
*This was a comprehensive review of the attributes and evidence for UBI, including country-level poverty and distributional implications, 
financing and the policy and social feasibility of UBI. For the purpose this review, we focus on chapters that review empirical evidence of 
cash transfer interventions.
N = number of included papers
N/R not reported
TABLE 1 SUMMARY OF REVIEW REPORTS ON UNCONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFERS, 2009–2019
9
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
WHAT OUTCOMES ARE  
ADDRESSED IN THE LITERATURE? 
Within the broad areas of focus, reviews 
address a range of outcomes at the 
individual- and community-level, and 
for implementation processes. Table 2 
describes overarching domains of interest 
and the measures or indicators used to 
operationalize the domains. Poverty and 
expenditures, labor and employment, 
education, and health and healthcare 
access are the most commonly investigated. 
DOMAIN  MEASURES AND INDICATOR(S) REVIEWS (First author/date)
INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL OUTCOMES
Poverty and expenditures Income (wage and profits) Baird 2018
Ability to meet basic needs Banks 2016; Pega 2019
Monetary poverty Banks 2016; Owusu-Addo 2018; Taafe 2017
Total household expenditure  
or consumption
Bastagli 2016; Hagen-Zanker 2011;  
Marinescu 2018; Owusu-Addo 2019
Food expenditure Bastagli 2016; Hagen-Zanker 2011
Poverty headcount Bastagli 2016; Hagen-Zanker 2011; 
Owusu-Addo 2019
Poverty gap Bastagli 2016; Owusu-Addo 2019
Squared poverty gap Bastagli 2016
Food insecurity Hagen-Zanker 2011
Healthcare expenditure Pega 2019
Savings, investment  
and production 
Household savings Bastagli 2016; Owusu-Addo 2019
Borrowing Bastagli 2016; Owusu-Addo 2019
Investment in productive assets 
(agricultural and other)
Bastagli 2016; Taafe 2017
Livestock ownership Bastagli 2016; Pega 2019
Involvement in business or enterprise Bastagli 2016
Household productivity Taaafe 2017
TABLE 2 DOMAINS, MEASURES AND INDICATORS ADDRESSED IN REVIEWS 
In most cases, indicators are addressed at 
the individual level, although community-
level labor and employment trends have 
been prominent in reviews that analyze 
potential impacts of a UBI in the United 
States. Given the potential for cash 
transfers to redress social inequities, 
several reviews conduct sub-group analysis 
for gender11,13,16 and measure absolute and 
relative inequality across outcomes.17 
(Continued)
10
DOMAIN MEASURES AND INDICATOR(S) REVIEWS (First author/date)
Labor and employment Adult labor force participation Bastagli 2016; Gibson 2018;  
Marinescu 2018; Pega 2019; Y oonge 2012
Adult hours worked/labor intensity Baird 2018; Bastagli 2016; Marinescu 2018
Adult labor intensity by sector Bastagli 2016
Adult type of work Baird 2018
Child and youth labor force 
participation
Bastagli 2016, de Hoop 2014; Gibson 2018; 
Owusu-Addo 2019; Pega 2019
Child and youth hours worked/labor 
intensity
Bastagli 2016; de Hoop 2014
Migration Bastagli 2016
Women’s Empowerment Physical abuse by a male partner Bastagli 2016
Non-physical abuse by a male partner Bastagli 2016
Women’s decision-making power  
and control over resources
Bastagli 2016; Owusu-Addo 2019
Marriage Bastagli 2016; Owusu-Addo 2019
Fertility Bastagli 2016
Use of contraception Bastagli 2016
Multiple sexual partners Bastagli 2016; Owusu-Addo 2019
Adolescent pregnancy Owusu-Addo 2019
Education School enrollment Baird 2013; Owusu-Addo 2019; Taafe 2017
School attendance Baird 2013; Bastagli 2016;  
Marinescu 2018; Owusu-Addo 2019
Test scores Baird 2013; Bastagli 2016;  
Marinescu 2018; Owusu-Addo 2019
Cognitive development Bastagli 2016
Educational attainment Gibson 2018; Hoynes 2019; Marinescu 2018
Parenting quality Pega 2019
Healthcare access Care seeking behavior Banks 2016; Owusu-Addo 2019; Pega 2019
Maternal health (antenatal visits;  
access to skilled delivery)
Owusu-Addo 2019; Taafe 2017
Hospital admissions Gibson 2018; Marinescu 2018
Registered births Owusu-Addo 2019; Pega 2019
HIV service utilization Taafe 2017
TABLE 2 DOMAINS, MEASURES AND INDICATORS ADDRESSED IN REVIEWS 
(Continued)
11
DOMAIN  MEASURES AND INDICATOR(S) REVIEWS (First author/date)
Health Mortality Pega 2019
General health Banks 2016; Gibson 2018; Hoynes 2019
Mental health Banks 2016; Hoynes 2019; Marinescu 2018; 
Owusu-Addo 2019; Pega 2019
Child anthropometry/nutritional status 
(underweight, child wasting)
Owusu-Addo 2019; Pega 2019
Nutritional status and dietary diversity Pega 2019; Taafe 2017
Birth weight Siddiqi 2019
Child mortality  
(neonatal and post-neonatal)
Siddiqi 2019
Gestational age Siddiqi 2019
Apgar scores at birth Siddiqi 2019
Reproductive health Use of contraceptive services  
or commodities
Khan 2016
Method continuation and/or switching Khan 2016
New contraceptive users Khan 2016
Civic Participation Participation in community 
decision-making
Owusu-Addo 2019
COMMUNITY-LEVEL OUTCOMES
Labor and employment Labor supply Hoynes 2019; Marinescu 2018
State-level wage rates Bastagli 2020
State-level number of employed and 
unemployed
Bastagli 2020
Early retirement rates Bastagli 2020
Conditions of paid work Bastagli 2020
Valuation and distribution of unpaid work Bastagli 2020
Economic development Increase in local businesses Taafe 2017
Health Contraceptive prevalence rate Khan 2016
Unmet need for modern contraceptive 
methods 
Khan 2016
IMPLEMENTATION PROCESSES
Role of program size Baird 2013
Role of evaluation structure Baird 2013
Role of quality of data Baird 2013
Program access Banks 2016
Quality of care and services Khan 2016
TABLE 2 DOMAINS, MEASURES AND INDICATORS ADDRESSED IN REVIEWS
12
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
HOW ARE UBI-TYPE PROGRAMS 
CONCEPTUALIZED AND DEFINED? 
PROGRAMS, POLICIES, EXPERIMENTS 
AND PILOTS THAT INFORM  
THE UBI DEBATE 
The studies that are used in review reports 
to project the impact of a UBI vary. Indeed, 
studies that analyze pilots, policies, and 
programs with quite different features 
have been used to arrive at conclusions 
about what could happen if everyone in 
a community or region received cash. 
For this report, all pilots, policies, and 
programs referenced in included reviews 
were classified according to the definitional 
features presented in the introduction of 
this report.
Programs, policies, experiments, and pilots 
fit into five broad categories (Table 3). A full 
list of programs covered by the reviews in 
these categories is included in Appendix 1: 
■ cash transfers, conditional and 
unconditional
■ social insurance
■ in-work benefits
■ dividend payments from resource  
sector or other revenues 
■ cash from non-work sources, such as 
private remittances or lottery winnings 
The broad categorizations include different 
combinations of the core, definitional features 
of a UBI: universality, unconditionality, in-cash, 
to individuals, and at a level that meets basic 
needs (Figure 1). Some pilots, policies, and 
programs that are included in the reviews 
synthesized for this report track more closely 
to the definitional features than others. For 
this reason, we break down interpretations of 
universality and unconditionality that explain 
some of the variability in studies that are 
included in reviews. 
Universality is the idea that every person is 
covered under a given scheme. Universality, 
though, has multiple interpretations; it can 
refer to programs where every person 
is paid or programs where every person 
is guaranteed to be covered based on 
demographic characteristics such as age or 
the average income in the area where they 
live. In the case where there are criteria for 
initial eligibility, a defining feature of UBI 
is continuing eligibility despite changes to 
income or other characteristics. 
Conditionality refers to requirements that are 
imposed to receive benefits. Conditions can 
refer to service requirements (attending a 
health clinic or attending school) and to work 
requirements. Service conditionalities are 
often used as an exclusion criteria by reviews, 
however some programs that require 
recipients to hold or seek employment in 
the formal economy are commonly used to 
draw conclusions about the impact of cash. 
Examples include social assistance programs 
with work requirements and income-based 
tax credits. Programs that do not meet any of 
the meanings of the definitional features may 
be included when reforms are introduced 
that allow researchers to evaluate changes 
in outcomes, as has been the case with 
the welfare assistance program Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)  
in the United States. 
13
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
Only a handful of the interventions covered 
by this review are truly unconditional and 
universal. In an exhaustive review, Gentilini 
and colleagues21 identify only a small 
number of schemes that reach everyone 
within a geographic region without means-
based or demographic targeting, and 
regardless of work history. These included 
national schemes in Mongolia and Iran, 
dividend transfers in Alaska and the Eastern 
Band of the Cherokee Nation, a one-off 
transfer to all citizens in Kuwait, and pilots 
financed by private contributions and 
the non-governmental organizations in 
Kenya and Namibia, and by the national 
government in India. Several of these 
programs are either short-term, or not set to  
a level that would meet basic needs. 
The types of evidence that is reviewed is 
also influenced by the existing coverage 
of a country’s social safety net. Targeted 
transfers that comprise the social safety 
nets of advanced economies are often not 
included in evidence reviews, while grants 
in low- and middle-income countries that 
resemble social assistance due to targeting 
are often classified as unconditional cash. 
14
  MEASURES AND INDICATOR(S) GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS OF REVIEW  (First author, date)
LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME HIGH-INCOME 
CASH TRANSFER CATEGORIES  
Cash transfer, conditional  
and unconditional 
Means-tested transfers Baird 2013; Baird 2016; Banerjee 2019; 
Banks 2016; Bastagli 2016; de Hoop 2014; 
Hagen-Zanker 2011; Owusu Addo 2019; 
Pega 2019
Hoynes and Rothstein 2019;  
Siddiqi 2019
Unconditional transfer within  
an unconditional/conditional 
trial or experiment
Baird 2013; Bastagli 2016;  
Khan 2016; Owusu Addo 2019
Universal, unconditional transfer Baird 2016; Banerjee 2020;  
Bastagli 2016; Gibson 2019
Negative income tax 
(guaranteed minimum income)
Bastali 2020; Hoynes and Rothstein 2019; 
Marinescu 2019; Siddiqi 2019
Social insurance  
Disability or dependency grants Banks 2016; Hagen Zanker 2011 
Child support grants Baird 2013; Baird 2016; Banerjee 2019; 
Banks 2016; Bastagli 2016; de Hoop 2014; 
Khan2016; Owusu Addo 2019; Pega 2019
Hoynes and Rothstein 2019;  
Siddiqi 2019
Non-contributory old age 
pensions and social security 
Baird 2013, Baird 2016; Banerjee 2019; 
Banks 2016; Bastagli 2016; de Hoop 2014; 
Hagen-Zanker 2011; Pega 2019;  
Siddiqi 2019; Y oonge 2012
Hoynes and Rothstein 2019
In-work benefits   
Income tax credits Hoynes and Rothstein 2019;  
Siddiqi 2019
Resource dividends
Bastagli 2020; Hoynes and  
Rothstein 2019; Marinescu 2019;  
Siddiqi 2019; Gibson 2019
Cash from other sources 
Private remittances Baird 2016
Lottery winnings Marinescu 2019
TABLE 3 PROGRAMS, POLICIES, PILOTS, AND EXPERIMENTS INCLUDED IN REVIEWS, BY GEOGRAPHIC FOCUS
15
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
WHAT ARE THE IMPACTS OF  
VARIOUS UBI-TYPE PROGRAMS?  
This section summarizes evidence for areas 
that have received the most attention from 
researchers and policymakers, and where 
the evidence is most robust. For each 
domain, main findings are synthesized 
across studies. While positive impacts are 
generally observed across the outcome 
areas highlighted in this report, it should 
be noted that reviews that apply the most 
stringent criteria for appraising evidence 
arrive at less certain conclusions for 
intervention impacts.17
The majority of reviews focus on low- and 
middle-income countries, but outcomes for 
high-income contexts are reported where 
evidence is available. While this report 
focuses on the outcomes of unconditional 
transfers that are likely to produce results 
closest to a UBI, high-level conclusions on 
the effectiveness of unconditional cash 
compared to other types of programs are 
included when these are addressed.  
What follows are main findings in the 
areas of poverty and investment, labor and 
employment, education and health. We also 
briefly discuss the ways that design features 
may impact outcomes. It is worth stating that 
effects of transfers in one outcome area may 
reinforce or mitigate impacts in other related 
areas, and that outcomes that are not 
described in detail here may be important 
pathways or mechanisms by which transfers 
achieve their intended impacts.9,11
POVERTY, CREDIT AND EXPENDITURES/
SAVINGS AND INVESTMENT 
Overall, evidence consistently demonstrates 
that unconditional cash in low- and middle-
income countries leads to a measurable 
decrease in poverty,9,11,19 although one 
review raises some uncertainty based on 
the quality of the evidence.17 For persons 
living with disabilities, transfers are generally 
insufficient to move out of poverty or 
beyond sustenance living, but evidence 
for this population was limited to social 
assistance programs.12 Family earnings 
and profit generally remain constant after 
families receive a cash transfers.14 No review 
reports on changes to poverty or household 
earnings for advanced economies. 
There is good evidence to demonstrate that 
an injection of cash increases household 
expenditures.5,11,15 Results are positive for 
food expenditure in all country contexts5,19 
and the purchase and ownership of assets 
such as livestock in low-and middle-income 
countries.11 Less of an impact is observed 
for the purchase of productive assets/
capital such as agricultural tools.11 Impacts 
are more mixed for savings and investment, 
with several studies indicating no significant 
results.8,11 Treatment effects may differ 
because of the varied constraints that 
people living in poverty face, indicating that 
cash transfers alone are unlikely to alleviate 
any one constraint on savings.8 Similarly, 
there is limited evidence that cash transfers 
boost access to credit for household 
expenditures and investments.11 
16
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT
The evidence from diverse interventions 
in low-, middle-, and high-income contexts 
indicates minimal impact on aggregate 
measures of labor market participation,3,5,6 
with some studies reporting an increase in 
work participation.11 When reductions do 
occur, time is channeled into other valued 
activities such as caregiving.6 
Greater differences for employment 
measures are observed depending on 
the type of intervention and between sub-
populations. Decreases in work hours, for 
example, are observed for single mothers 
in means-tested programs in the United 
States, and for single and married women 
in households that received non means-
tested transfers,5 but other reports indicate 
increases in labor market participation for 
those that receive tax credits.3,6 Small but 
not significant reductions are also observed 
in households that receive remittances.15 
In low- and middle-income contexts, 
reductions in labor market participation 
are observed among the elderly,6,11,15 those 
caring for dependents,6,11 women with 
care responsibilities,1 married women with 
children1 and those in casual and occasional 
work.1 In the case of the latter group, there 
are positive but mixed results that individuals 
shift from wage labor to work that carries 
more financial risks, such as own agricultural 
work or non-agricultural household 
businesses.15 Men’s retirement pensions 
have no effect on the labor of working-aged 
men, but a negative effect is observed for 
working-aged women; conversely, when 
women receive pensions, the labor supply 
is reduced among men, leading to a net 
decrease in household income.2,14 Mixed 
results are observed in youth labor market 
participation, but the effects decrease 
as children age, and in some cases 
children’s participation in household work 
may increase with family investments in 
agricultural assets from cash transfers.16
EDUCATION
There is considerable evidence of an impact 
on educational attainment across country 
contexts. Clear and significant impacts 
are well-documented for educational 
outcomes that would be expected in the 
short term, such as school enrollment and 
attendance,3,5,11,14,19 but impacts diminish over 
time.19 Fewer improvements are reported 
for outcomes that may require longer 
periods over which to observe effects, 
including student achievement on learning 
outcomes15,19 and cognitive development11 
in low-and middle-income contexts. Some 
effects on test scores are observed in 
high-income countries,5 but gender-based 
analysis somewhat complicates this picture. 
Women’s eligibility for cash transfer results 
in increased expenditures on children’s 
schooling, but no significant effect is 
observed for the children of eligible men.13 
Evidence for investments in girls and boys 
is mixed, with some evidence suggesting 
that schooling effects are more significant 
for boys, and others for girls.13 In all cases, 
effect sizes are larger for conditional cash 
transfers,14,19 but the significance of the 
differences varies depending on the extent 
of the conditions and whether they are 
enforced or monitored.15 
17
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
There is consistent evidence across contexts 
for improvements to health status and to the 
myriad behavioral and social factors that are 
linked to leading causes of premature ill-
health, disability, and death. A small number 
of studies report on disease outcomes, with 
some evidence for clinically meaningful 
reductions in the likelihood of having any 
disease with sustained effects two years 
into the interventions17 and reductions in 
sexually transmitted infections.19 Positive 
impacts were generally observed for mental 
health,5,19 but some negative impacts were 
also observed due to social stigma and 
fear of benefits for persons with disabilities 
receiving targeted supports.12
Given the long timeframe to directly observe 
health impacts, many studies report on 
clinical and behavioral risk factors for future 
poor health. There are mixed results for 
clinical measures in children, with limited 
impact on anthropometric measures,11,17 and 
some positive effects on birthweight,5,20 
preterm birth,20 and Apgar scores.20 When 
program characteristics are taken into 
account, the most significant effects on 
birth weight in advanced economies are 
observed among low-income and white 
populations in targeted and unconditional 
programs, while programs that are 
accompanied by work conditions yielded 
no or mixed effects, or even negative effects 
when work reforms were introduced to 
existing social welfare programs.20 
Several reviews examine reproductive status 
and health, with positive impacts observed 
for use of contraceptives,11,18 early marriage,11 
and unplanned pregnancy11,18 in low- and 
middle-income contexts, and a decrease in 
fertility in high-income countries.5 Impacts 
increase with the duration of the benefit,11 but 
in the case of contraceptive use, decrease 
over time.18 The evidence is inconsistent for 
whether these effects are greater in girls 
and women or boys and men.13,19 
Evidence was mixed for healthcare access, 
with some evidence for positive impacts on 
health seeking behaviors and the uptake 
of health services 11,19 and for household 
spending on healthcare. 17 However, one 
review found that improvements were 
more likely for programs where enrollment 
in national health care or health service 
utilization were included as program 
incentives.19 Mixed results were observed 
for access to antenatal care and skilled 
delivery attendants. 19 
Some studies investigate impacts on social 
determinants of health. While the evidence 
for social determinants of health, such as 
education, income and employment, are 
more robust, less evidence is available for 
other social determinants, such as housing 
conditions and quality, civic participation, 
community resilience, and women’s 
empowerment.19 The health impact on food 
security is generally well-reported, with 
positive effects on food security,17 food 
expenditure,11 and dietary diversity.17 The 
gender of the recipient impacts nutritional 
effects, with greater impacts observed for 
girls over boys.13
18
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
There is enthusiasm for unconditional 
transfers within a broad coalition of policy 
communities. Our ‘cross-synthesis of 
reviews’ signals that a vast literature has 
amassed on interventions that share one or 
more features with a UBI. We identify several 
take-aways from the current evidence base 
and directions for future research. 
There is an obvious research evidence 
gap in the evaluation of an experimental, 
sustained UBI, which is considered the 
‘gold standard’ for evidence. There is a 
shortage of evidence that meets most or 
all of the definitional features of a UBI, and 
the interventions covered by this report 
vary significantly. To arrive at conclusions 
at what may occur if all core features 
were unified into UBI policy, reviews have 
synthesized evidence from interventions 
that may not meet the most stringent 
definitions of universality or unconditionality. 
Existing experiments with cash payments 
that are defined as universal often require 
recipients to have a sufficiently low income 
to qualify. Additionally, universal programs 
rarely provide support at a level that would 
allow people to meet their basic needs. 
TAKE-AWAYS  
AND DIRECTIONS 
FOR FUTURE 
RESEARCH 
4
A truly universal program may produce 
significantly different results based on 
increased coverage and a change in the 
identity of recipients to those who are less 
vulnerable.3,8 Given the feasibility challenges 
of implementing a universal program at 
scale, modelling studies may account for 
heterogeneity in populations and contexts 
may improve an understanding of the 
impacts of hypothetical policy reforms. 
Specifically, these methods can estimate how 
differences in household circumstances and 
complex interactions with tax and benefit 
systems may impact intervention effects.5  
Findings are generally positive that UBI-
type programs alleviate poverty and 
improve health and education outcomes 
and that the effects on labor market 
participation are minimal. There are a 
variety of other outcomes that have been 
pursued by researchers but where evidence 
is less certain. More research is needed 
on outcomes such as stigma and social 
cohesion to clarify the imperative to provide 
transfers universally. Our review surfaced 
that impacts of UBI-type programs are not 
uniform across all groups. Sub-group analysis 
that more comprehensively examines how 
intersectional factors—such as gender, race 
and age—modify intervention impacts could 
elucidate for whom UBI matters and why. 
It is evident from the social inequalities’ 
literature that income differences between 
groups matter for many of the outcomes that 
a UBI is intended to improve. Without careful 
attention to uneven impacts, interventions 
risk leaving existing inequalities untouched, 
or even exacerbating them, rather than 
ameliorating the issue. Further research 
19
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
is required to identify how different policy 
designs address not only absolute changes 
in outcomes among recipients, but also 
relative gaps based on income levels.20 
The contexts where interventions are 
introduced are relevant for anticipating 
how interventions may work across 
settings and are also important for 
determining what types of programs are 
considered as unconditional and universal. 
Examining the variability in interventions 
that are claimed to approximate a UBI 
is important. In countries with minimal or 
fragmented welfare states, the injection 
of cash through payments or categorical 
transfers may play a very different role 
than when interventions are introduced 
into and evaluated against a more robust 
social safety net. Simply put, effects that are 
observed under some social and economic 
conditions may not transfer elsewhere. 
Evidence is also limited for how cash 
transfers may interact with the existing fabric 
of social supports in countries with well-
established social safety nets, or how cash 
transfers compare to spending on other 
public goods in settings with less collective 
infrastructure. This is highly relevant to 
decisions about universality in settings 
where individuals are guaranteed benefits in 
an existing system of supports. Experiments 
which are underway in many countries 
across the globe will allow for comparison 
between individuals receiving benefits 
under the current system and those who 
receive additional unconditional cash  
and clarify the relative effectiveness  
of unconditional cash under different  
welfare schemes. 
The potential trade-offs between UBI and 
other programs are largely unaddressed. 
There is limited attention to the impact of the 
broader social and fiscal policy environment 
on outcomes within the existing body of 
evidence. It is widely agreed that financing 
a UBI will require new revenue streams 
or diversions from existing programs. The 
interactions between UBI and additional taxes 
or decreases in expenditures from other 
programs are needed for a more complete 
picture of program effects.5   
A small body of evidence examines the 
pathways or mechanisms by which UBI-
programs trigger particular outcomes.  
Most of this evidence focuses on individual  
and household determinants or program design 
features that mediate impacts. However, 
recipients of cash transfers are embedded 
in broader environments. Outcomes are not 
simply the result of changes to individual 
factors, but rather their interactions with 
contextual factors that operate at multiple 
conceptual levels—from local neighbourhoods 
to the broader policy environment. In other 
words, UBI implementation must account for 
the environments where people live, work, and 
play, as these contextual factors can enable or 
constrain the decisions people make in ways 
that either amplify or diminish intervention 
effects. There are several frameworks that 
conceptualize the relationships between 
individuals and their environments that can be 
deployed to better contextualize interventions 
at the local-level. Future research that 
examines these pathways should also examine 
complementary policies or programs at the 
community-level to maximize the benefit  
of a UBI. 
20
What we know about Universal Basic Income: A cross-synthesis of reviews
There has been limited research on  
the impact of UBI-type programs at the 
community level. Research to date has 
focused on more proximate impacts for 
individuals and households. The question of 
what happens in a community when some or 
all of its members receive unconditional cash 
remains to be answered. Most pilots and 
experiments that are planned or underway 
have not implemented true universality 
due to feasibility constraints or concerns 
about fairness.22 Given these decisions 
GAP 
Evaluation of a long-lasting, universal UBI 
 
Equity implications of different policy designs 
Relative effectiveness of UBI under different 
welfare schemes
Trade-offs between UBI and tax and  
benefit systems
Pathways and mechanisms or contextual 
features through which UBI achieves impacts
Economic and social spill-over effects  
in communities
DIRECTION  
Evidence-based theories of change that 
credibly demonstrate how immediate 
indicators relate to long term change
 
Modelling studies to account for dynamic, 
heterogenous conditions and interactions  
under different policy scenarios
Analysis of relative outcomes between 
population groups
Experimental designs that compare  
UBI recipients with those receiving the 
existing supports
 
Measurement of individual and community- 
level mediators of intervention effects
Measurement of community-level  
indicators of intervention impact
about recipient populations, a better grasp 
of ‘spill-over’ effects shed light on what 
happens when there is an injection of cash 
within a community or region. Defining 
community-level social, economic, cultural 
and political measures or indicators that 
encompass a broader definition of health 
and well-being might address question 
on how benefits or harms are distributed 
outside of recipient populations and build 
the normative case for a UBI. 
RESEARCH GAPS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR RESEARCH 

21
1.  Bor J, Cohen GH, Galea S. Population health in an era of rising income inequality: USA, 1980–2015. 
The Lancet. 2017;389(10077):1475-1490. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30571-8
2.  Ferreira FHG, Ravallion M. Global poverty and inequality: A review of the evidence.   
The World Bank; 2008. doi:10.1596/1813-9450-4623
3.  Hoynes H, Rothstein J. Universal Basic Income in the US and Advanced Countries .  
National Bureau of Economic Research; 2019. doi:10.3386/w25538
4.  Bidadanure JU. The political theory of Universal Basic Income. Annu Rev Polit Sci .  
2019;22(1):481-501. doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-050317-070954
5.  Marinescu I. No strings attached: The behavioral effects of U.S. unconditional cash transfer 
programs. National Bureau of Economic Research; 2018. https://www.nber.org/papers/w24312.pdf
6.  Gentilini U, Grosh M, Rigolini J, Y emtsov R, eds. Universal Basic Income and work. In: Exploring 
Universal Basic Income: A Guide to Navigating Concepts, Evidence, and Practices . The World 
Bank; 2019. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1458-7
7.  Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, Group TP. Preferred reporting items for systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA Statement. PLOS Medicine. 2009;6(7):e1000097. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097
8.  Banerjee A, Niehaus P, Suri T. Universal Basic Income in the Developing World. Annual Review of 
Economics. 2019;11(1):959-983. doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-080218-030229
9.  Hagen-Zanker J, McCord A, Holmes R. Systematic review of the impact of employment 
guarantee schemes and cash transfers on the poor . Overseas Development Institute; 2011:104. 
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/7161.pdf
10.  Gibson M, Hearty W, Craig P. Universal Basic Income: A scoping review of evidence on impacts 
and study characteristics. What Works Scotland; 2018:102. http://whatworksscotland.ac.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2018/10/WhatWorksScotlandBasicIncomeScopingReview1210FINAL.pdf
11.  Bastagli F, Hagen-Zanker J, Harman L, Barca V, Sturge G, Schmidt T. Cash transfers: What does 
the evidence say? Overseas Development Institute; 2016:300. https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.
uk/files/resource-documents/11316.pdf
12.  Banks LM, Mearkle R, Mactaggart I, Walsham M, Kuper H, Blanchet K. Disability and social 
protection programmes in low- and middle-income countries: A systematic review. Oxford 
Development Studies . 2017;45(3):223-239. doi:10.1080/13600818.2016.1142960
13.  Y oong J, Rabinovich L, Diepeveen S. The impact of economic resource transfers to women 
versus men: A systematic review . EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of 
Education, Institute of Education; 2012:113. https://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Default.aspx?tabid=3306
REFERENCES
22
14.  Baird S, Ferreira FHG, Özler B, Woolcock M. Relative effectiveness of conditional and 
unconditional cash transfers for schooling outcomes in Developing Countries: A Systematic 
Review. Campbell Systematic Reviews . 2013;9(1):1-124. doi:10.4073/csr.2013.8
15.  Baird S, McKenzie D, Özler B. The effects of cash transfers on adult labor market outcomes.  
IZA J Develop Migration . 2018;8(1):22. doi:10.1186/s40176-018-0131-9
16.  de Hoop J, Rosati FC. Cash transfers and child labor. The World Bank Research Observer . 
2014;29(2):202-234. doi:10.1093/wbro/lku003
17.  Pega F, Liu SY, Walter S, Pabayo R, Saith R, Lhachimi SK. Unconditional cash transfers for 
reducing poverty and vulnerabilities: Effect on use of health services and health outcomes in 
low- and middle-income countries. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2017; 11:1-140. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD011135.pub2
18.  Khan ME, Hazra A, Kant A, Ali M. Conditional and unconditional cash transfers to improve use 
of contraception in low and middle income countries: A systematic review. Studies in Family 
Planning. 2016;47(4):371-383. doi:10.1111/sifp.12004
19.  Owusu-Addo E, Renzaho AMN, Smith BJ. The impact of cash transfers on social determinants 
of health and health inequalities in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review. Health Policy Plan . 
2018;33(5):675-696. doi:10.1093/heapol/czy020
20.  Siddiqi A, Rajaram A, Miller SP. Do cash transfer programmes yield better health in the first year 
of life? A systematic review linking low-income/middle-income and high-income contexts. Arch Dis 
Child. 2018;103(10):920-926. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-314301
21.  Gentilini U, Grosh M, Rigolini J, Y emtsov R, eds. Exploring Universal Basic Income: A Guide to 
Navigating Concepts, Evidence, and Practices. The World Bank; 2019. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1458-7
22.  Bidadanure J, Kline S, Moore C, Rainwater B, Thomas C. Basic Income in Cities: A Guide to 
Experiments and Pilot Projects. National League of Cities and Stanford Basic Income Lab; 2018:31. 
https://www.nlc.org/sites/default/files/2018-11/BasicIncomeInCities_Report_For%20Release%20.pdf
23
CATEGORY PILOTS, EXPERIMENTS, PROGRAMS, POLICIES
Cash grants, conditional and unconditional 
Means-tested transfers  Basic Social Subsidy Program (Mozambique)
Basic Social Subsidy Program (Mozambique)
Benazir Income Support Program (Pakistan)
Bone de Desarollo Humano (Ecuador)
Concern Worldwide Drought Response 
Direct Cash Transfer Program (Indonesia)
Harmonized social cash transfer (Zimbabwe)
Hunger Safety Net Programme (Kenya)
Innovation for Poverty Randomized Trial (Ghana)
Monze Cash Transfer Pilot (Zambia)
Multiple Category Targeting Grant (Zambia)
Nahouri Cash Transfers Pilot Program (Burkina Faso)
Ndhima Ekonomike (Albania)
Plan de Atención Nacional a la Emergencia Social (Uruguay)
Programa de Apoyo Alimentario (Mexico)
Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (Uganda)
Social Cash Transfer Scheme (Malawi)
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (USA)
Temporary UCT (Indonesia)
Unconditional within a unconditional/
conditional experiment 
Community led cash transfer program (Zimbabwe) 
Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (Ghana)
Prospective Nutrition Intervention Study (Niger) 
Schooling, Income and Health Risk (Malawi)
Tayssir (Morocco)
Zomba Cash Transfer Programme (Malawi)
Universal, unconditional transfer B-Mincome (Spain)
Give Directly (Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda)
Kela Basic Income Experiment (Finland)
Madhya Pradesh (India)
Negative income tax, guaranteed  
minimum income 
Manitoba Basic Annual Income Experiment (MINCOME) (Canada)
Seattle-Denver Income Maintenance Experiment (SIME/DIME)  
(United States)
APPENDIX 1
(Continued)
24
CATEGORY PILOTS, EXPERIMENTS, PROGRAMS, POLICIES
Social insurance  
Disability or dependency grants Namibian Disability Grant (Namibia)
South African Disability Grant (South Africa)
Social Security Disability Insurance (USA)
Child support grants Child Support Grant (South Africa)
Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children (Kenya)
Child Grant Program (Zambia)
Child Grant Programme (Lesotho)
Child Benefit (Canada)
Cash benefit to mothers on social assistance (Canada)
Non-contributory old age pensions and  
social security
Beneficio de Prestacaro Continuada (Brazil)
Bonosol (Bolivia)
Mexico’s 70 y Más (Mexico)
Old Age Pension Program (South Africa)
Old Age Pension (Brazil)
Programa de Atención a Adultos Mayores en Zonas Rurales (Brazil)
Social Pension Previdencia Rural and Renda Mensual Vitalicia  
(Brazil and South Africa)
Supplementary Security Income (USA)
In-work benefits Child Tax Credit (USA)
EITC (USA)
Resource dividends Alaska Permanent Dividend Fund (USA)
Bantuan Langsung Tunai, Fuel Subsidy (Indonesia) 
Californian Native American Nations tribal casino dividend (USA)
Eastern Cherokee Bank of Indians Casino Dividend (USA
Meskawai Nation Casino Dividend (USA)