NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOMES VS. TARGETED TRANSFERS:
ANTI-POVERTY PROGRAMS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Rema Hanna
Benjamin A. Olken
Working Paper 24939
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24939
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2018
Prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. We thank Abhijit Banerjee, Amy Finkelstein 
and Rohini Pande for helpful comments and discussions on these issues, Tim Taylor and the 
editors of the JEP for helpful editorial suggestions, and Aaron Berman and Samuel Solomon for 
helpful research assistance. This research was supported by a grant from the Australian 
Department of Foreign Affairs  and Trade. The views expressed herein are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this 
research. 
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24939.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official 
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Rema Hanna and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to 
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, 
including 
© notice, is given to the source.
Universal Basic Incomes vs. Targeted Transfers: Anti-Poverty Programs in Developing Countries 
Rema Hanna and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 24939
August 2018
JEL No. H53,O12
ABSTRACT
Developing country governments are increasingly implementing cash assistance programs to 
combat poverty and inequality. This paper examines the potential tradeoffs between targeting 
these transfers towards low income households versus providing universal cash transfers, also 
known as a Universal Basic Income. We start by discussing how the fact that most households in 
poor countries do not pay income taxes changes how we conceptually think about Universal Basic 
Incomes. We then analyze data from two countries, Indonesia and Peru, to document the tradeoffs 
involved. The results suggest that, despite the imperfections in targeting using proxy-means tests, 
targeted transfers may result in substantially higher welfare gains than universal programs, 
because for a given total budget they deliver much higher transfers to the poor. On the other hand, 
targeted transfers do lead to more horizontal  equity violations, and do create an implied tax on 
consumption in the region where benefits are phased out. We discuss how alternative targeting 
approaches, such as community-targeting and self-targeting,  can be used to further improve 
targeting in some situations.
Rema Hanna
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Rema_Hanna@hks.harvard.edu
Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics, E52-542
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA  02139
and NBER
bolken@mit.edu
A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24939
1 
 
 
 
Of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals articulated by the Unit ed Nations, number one 
is the elimination of extreme poverty by 2030. In recent years,  the largest reductions in extreme 
poverty worldwide have resulted from substantial economic growth in many emerging economies, 
particularly China and India (Page and Pande 2018). While futur e growth should continue to 
reduce poverty, it will not solv e the problem by itself – both because a substantial amount of 
poverty remains even in rapidly growing countries, and because sustained economic growth over 
decades of the type seen in China is the exception, not the norm (Jones and Olken 2008). 
Given these realities, there is a potentially important role fo r national-level transfer 
programs that assist poor families in developing countries. Suc h programs are often run by 
developing country governments. For example, China’s rural minimum living standard guarantee 
(Dibao) program reaches nearly 75 million individuals (Golan, Sicular, and Umapathi 2017), while 
Mexico’s conditional cash transfer program reaches 32 million i ndividuals (World Bank 2014). 
As countries become wealthier, a greater share of GDP usually goes to social transfer and insurance 
programs (Chetty and Looney 2006), suggesting that these types of safety net programs are likely 
to expand in many developing countries. 
Many countries have implemented transfer programs that seek to target beneficiaries: that 
is, to identify who is poor and then to restrict transfers to those individuals. In developed countries, 
because one rarely observes true income-earning ability, targeting is usually based on income (see, 
for example, Mirrlees 1971). But in developing countries, governments do not observe income for 
the vast majority of the population who work in the informal sector, which typically includes most 
of the poor. Imperfect targeting using various proxy measures f or income leads to both inclusion 
errors (giving the transfer to those who are not poor) and exclusion errors (failing to deliver the 
transfer to poor individuals who slip through the cracks in the targeting protocol).  
Given these challenges, some have begun to advocate for “univer sal basic income” 
programs, which dispense with try ing to identify the poor and instead provide transfers to 
everyone. A universal basic income program is comparatively straightforward to implement – each 
individual receives a fixed transfer, regardless of income – so the main challenge is to ensure that 
each person receives the transfer only once. Although universal basic income programs distribute 
2 
 
the same value of transfer to everyone, includi ng the very rich , if they are financed through 
proportional or progressive taxation, they can still result in a substantial redistribution to the poor. 
We begin by considering the universal basic income as part of t he solution to an optimal 
income-taxation problem, focusing on the case of developing cou ntries, where there is limited 
income data and inclusion in the formal tax system is low. We e xamine how the targeting of 
transfer programs is conducted in these settings, and provide e mpirical evidence on the tradeoffs 
involved between universal basic income and targeted transfer schemes using data from Indonesia 
and Peru – two countries that run nationwide transfer programs that are targeted to the poor. We 
conclude by linking our findings back the broader policy debate on what tools should be preferred 
for redistribution, as well as the practical challenges of administering them in developing countries.  
 
Conceptual Connections and Underpinnings 
Universal Basic Incomes and the Tax Schedule 
A universal basic income is usually conceived of as a fixed tra nsfer given to everyone, 
regardless of income level. Such programs are fairly rare in pr actice, with prominent examples 
coming from places with substantial natural resource revenues. For example, Alaska’s Permanent 
Fund transfers a fixed amount – usually between $1,000 and $2,000 per person, per year – to every 
citizen of the state. Iran implemented a similar program starti ng in 2011 (Salehi-Isfahani and 
Mostafavi-Dehzooei 2017). Common arguments that are made for un iversal basic income 
programs include their ease of implementation and low administr ative costs, because the 
government does not have to verify income. Another common argument is that such programs do 
not distort labor supply, because the payments do not decline if you work more, but as we discuss 
below, this claim about non-distortion turns out to be more complex. 
For most developing economies, a substantial universal basic in come would need to be 
financed via domestic taxation, because official development as sistance is a small fraction of 
government budgets. For example, for countries ranked as “upper  middle-income” by the World 
Bank, such as Peru, Lebanon, and the Dominican Republic, overall tax revenue was approximately 
157 times the amount of net official development assistance rec eived in 2010. This pattern also 
holds for “lower middle-income” countries, such as Indonesia, India, and Morocco, where overall 
3 
 
tax revenue in 2010 was approximately 14 times the amount of de velopment assistance received. 
It is only with “low-income” c ountries, such as Afghanistan, Et hiopia and Mozambique, that 
official development assistance exceeded tax revenue – that is, approximately 1.2 times the amount 
of tax revenue in 2010.1   
Given that a universal basic income would need to be financed t hrough taxation, one can 
recast universal basic transfers as a particular feature of a tax schedule, as described by Saez (2002) 
and illustrated by Figure 1. We assume that a universal basic income program is fully financed by 
a progressive income tax schedule. Pre-tax income 𝑦 for an individual appears on the horizontal 
axis, and after-tax income 𝛼ሺ𝑦ሻ for that individual is on the vertical axis. The tax paid by a  
household is therefore given by 𝑦െ𝛼 ሺ 𝑦 ሻ). The universal b asic income – the transfer given to 
everyone, regardless of their income – is thus equal to 𝛼ሺ0ሻ on the vertical axis. This perspective 
suggests that any tax-and-transfer system that has the feature that 𝛼ሺ0ሻ ൐0  can be thought of as a 
universal basic income.  
Figure 1 plots a progressive tax schedule with and without a fully financed universal basic 
income. The universal basic income acts as an intercept shifter, raising post-tax income at 𝑦ൌ0 . 
However, it will not raise everyone’s after-tax income by that same amount, because to finance 
the universal basic income out of income taxes, marginal tax ra tes have to increase for someone. 
This illustrates three points a bout the universal basic income:  1) it can make use of income data 
collected through the tax system; 2) although a universal basic income acts as an intercept shifter, 
raising post-tax income at 𝑦ൌ0 , it will not raise everyone’s after-tax income by the same amount; 
and 3) as emphasized by Saez (2002), it is not the case that a universal basic income has no labor 
supply distortions, since there is still a tax on labor income, and in particular adding the universal 
basic income to the tax schedule requires adjusting the tax schedule elsewhere.  
                                                            
1 Data on taxes and official development assistance come from the World Development Indicators. Data on social 
spending come from the International Labor Organization Social Security Inquiry 
[http://www.ilo.org/dyn/ilossi/ssimain.home?p_lang=en]. For each comparison above, we include only countries with 
non-missing data for both variables (for example, we sum and co mpare tax revenue and official development 
assistance only among countries with non-missing data for both) . Country classifications are from the World Bank, 
where low-income countries have 2015 gross national per-capita incom e of $1,025 or less; lower m iddle-incom e, 
$1,026–4,035; upper middle-income, $4,036–12,475; and high-income, $12,476 or more. 
4 
 
From this perspective, the tradeoffs involved in adding a univer s a l  b a s i c  i n c o m e  t o  a n  
income tax schedule, therefore, depend on how the rest of the income tax schedule is adjusted to 
satisfy the government budget constraint: both in terms of overall redistribution and how this 
affects potential distortionary e ffects from the increased marg inal tax rates that introducing a 
universal basic income will necessitate. Saez (2002) discusses these conditions in detail. He also 
discusses the conditions under which an optimal income tax schedule is likely to feature a universal 
basic income – essentially, when intensive labor supply elasticities (the effects of changes in wages 
on hours of existing workers) are  larger than extensive labor s upply elasticities (the effect of 
changes in wages on hours of workers entering or leaving the labor force).  
Having a program that assures a transfer for those with zero or very low income could also 
be important for reasons outside the basic Mirrlees (1971)/Saez (2002) model.  For one, could 
provide insurance for individuals to take risks: for example, choosing to plant a crop that could be 
high-return but has a non-trivial probability of zero income might be a more attractive option with 
a universal basic income in place. The same ideas could be applied to other types of risky decisions, 
such as human capital investment (Stantcheva 2014).  
 
What about Poor Countries, Where Tax Systems are Less Developed? 
In a developed country, where the government observes income fo r most people and can 
redistribute through the tax syst em, this framework is broadly applicable. However, if we are 
interested in the poor in developing countries, it is more complicated. 
In less developed countries, subs tantial activity occurs in the  “informal sector” that 
includes casual labor, undocumented firms, and small farms. Thus, most individuals are outside 
the tax net. Jensen (2016) documents that the share of employment for which people pay any taxes 
(and therefore for which the government observes income) rises substantially with real per-capita 
national GDP. Conversely, in most poor countries, the government just does not observe any 
information about income for most people, and in particular, for the poor. In Indonesia and Peru – 
the two countries that we explore in detail below – Jensen reports that 87.5 percent and 79 percent 
of the employed population has incomes below the tax exclusion thresholds, respectively. Jensen 
argues that these thresholds emerge from the work environment – when most people work in large 
5 
 
firms, the government can easily observe incomes (Kleven, Krein er, and Saez 2016). But when 
there is a large informal sector, or many people work on their own or in tiny firms, as is true in 
most developing countries (Hsieh and Olken 2014), this is not possible. 
Why does this matter? Figure 2 illustrates an example tax sched ule with and without a 
universal basic income when most individuals – in developing co untries, often upwards of 80 
percent of people –fall into a t ax-exempt region. In the tax-exempt region, everyone receives the 
same net transfer regardless of whether they are in the 5 th or 70th percentile of income (unlike in 
Figure 1). However, to introduce a similarly-sized universal ba sic income, one would need to 
increase the marginal tax rates of those relatively few people inside the tax net substantially more 
to finance it. To the extent that these are formal or particularly productive firms, such a tax increase 
may have disproportionally larger efficiency consequences. 
In this way, a universal basic income will function somewhat differently in a country with 
a large number of people outside the tax net. In particular, 1) the net transfer could be the same for 
the majority of the population (a ll those below the tax-exempt cutoff), which may not be the 
optimal resource allocation if we want to focus on the poorest of the poor; and 2) relatively few 
households will be able to contribute to the financing, which may restrict the overall level of funds 
available for the universal basic income. In countries with large numbers of people outside the tax 
net, any attempt to target resources toward the poorest of the poor requires using an alternative 
data collection approach beyond the income tax system. 
This dis cuss ion thus fa r has assum ed that a universal bas ic  income is financed entirely 
through income taxes (individual or corporate), which in developing countries are paid primarily 
by the very top earners. Combined, these taxes, plus import duties (which are also likely to fall on 
the rich), make up about 42 per cent of tax revenue for low and middle income countries (World 
Bank 2018), with the rest of tax revenue in these countries coming from consumption taxes, which 
are typically proportional to consumption. A universal basic income financed through a 
combination of an income and consumption tax will look closer to a combination of Figures 1 and 
2. In this case, one can tax back some of the transfer on house holds below the income tax 
exemption through the consumption tax, but the fact that the ta x is generally proportional to 
consumption limits the flexibility in doing so. 
 
6 
 
How to Target the Poor in Developing Countries 
 How can developing country governments target the poor when income is not observable? 
When the government observes a proxy for income and targets households based on that, one has 
what is termed a “proxy-means test.” The implementation of a proxy-means test is typically based 
on large, periodic quasi-censuses of the population, focusing o n those most likely to be poor. In 
these censuses, government enumerators go door-to-door, often v isiting millions of households. 
Some countries, such as India, do target government assistance based on self-reported and 
unverified income, but this is the exception, not the rule, bec ause people can easily lie if there is 
no way of verifying it. Instead, government census enumerators typically ask about assets, all of 
which are easy to observe directly. Examples might include ownership of items such as televisions 
and refrigerators, the type of material used in one’s roof, floor, and walls, the number of rooms in 
one’s house, and so on.  
The government uses these assets to predict incomes (or per-cap ita consumption, which 
can be easier to measure in survey data). Thus, eligibility for benefits is based on predicted, rather 
than actual, income. This method is quite common, and is used i n both large countries such as 
Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, Mexico, and the Philippines, as well as a number of smaller countries, 
ranging from Burkina Faso to Ecuador to Jamaica (Fiszbein and Schady 2009). 
There are a variety of methods to predict income (or consumption), but they all share basic 
features. The government takes another dataset that was collected in a low-stakes context (e.g. one 
collected not for targeting, but rather just for research purpo ses), and therefore for which 
households have no strong incentive to lie. In this dataset, the government observes the same asset 
variables as in the proxy-means census and also observes a meas ure of poverty, such as a 
household’s monthly income or per-capita expenditure. The gover nment then estimates a 
regression with the measure of poverty as the dependent variabl e and the assets as explanatory 
variables. The proxy-means score is the predicted income or exp enditure, which the government 
can calculate for any household using the coefficients from that regression.  
7 
 
The government then can set a threshold for eligibility and dis tribute benefits to all 
households with predicted incomes below the threshold.2 If the government sets the threshold level 
for eligibility in such a way th at it covers the entire populat ion, then a “targeted” program 
effectively becomes a universal basic income. Because predictio ns of income, of course, happen 
with error, targeted systems based on a proxy-means test will feature both inclusion and exclusion 
errors. 
 
Comparing Targeted Programs to a Universal Basic Income: 
Examples from Indonesia and Peru  
Depending on the policy context, either a universal basic incom e or a targeted program 
may dominate the other. Besley (1990) provides an early discussion of tradeoffs between the two 
approaches. Here, we illustrate the tradeoffs using data from I ndonesia and Peru, two countries 
that have targeted, nationwide transfer programs. The simulatio ns described this section 
(particularly Figures 4 and 5) are broadly similar to other analyses of targeting performance, such 
as Ravallion (2009), Alatas et al. (2012), and particularly Klasen and Lange (2016). 
 Indonesia has a number of targeted transfer programs, ranging from conditional cash 
transfers (Program Keluarga Hara pan or PKH) to scholarships for poor students (Bantuan Siswa 
Miskin or BSM) to subsidized health insurance for the poor. In addition, the government has 
periodically conducted nationwide,  unconditional cash transfers  (previously called Bantuan 
Langsung Tunai or BLT, and more recently called Bantuan Langsun g Sementara Masyarakat, or 
BLSM). The government has conducted nationwide targeting censuses approximately every three 
years since 2005, and then uses proxy-means testing.  
Several different types of transfer programs also exist in Peru , ranging from nutritional 
subsidies (Vaso de Leche) to s ubsidized health insurance (Seguro Integral de Salud, or SIS) to 
                                                            
2 Once the eligibility threshold for a program is set, most devel oping countries do not vary the level of assistance 
among the eligible group. Part of the reason is that the imprec ision of estimating income based on assets is well 
understood. Also, it is easier for reasons of politics and transparency just to explain that a given program provides all 
who are eligible with a certain benefit. However, countries do try to replicate the more sophisticated version of linking 
level of benefits to predicted income levels by having programs  with different eligibility cutoffs. For example, in 
Indonesia, the conditional cash transfer program called PKH tar gets roughly the bottom 7-10 percent of households 
(the “very poor”), but those who are in roughly the bottom 40 p ercent of the national income distribution (the “near-
poor”) can qualify for subsidized health insurance even if they cannot access PKH. 
 
8 
 
conditional cash transfers for poor families (Programa Nacional  de Apoyo Directo a los Más 
Pobres, or Juntos). Eligibility for these programs is determined by a proxy-means targeting system, 
the Sistema de Focalización de Hogares (SISFOH), which assigns households a numerical index 
to identify eligible households and then allows each individual  program to select its final list of 
beneficiaries. Recertification occurs every three years via a new targeting survey. 
 For simplicity, we choose one targeted program per country to explore (although the basic 
results would continue to hold if we chose a basket of programs ). In Indonesia, we focus on the 
Bantuan Langsung Tunai (BLT) program, a temporary and periodic unconditional cash transfer to 
poor households. The program was implemented first in 2005-2006, and then again in 2008-2009 
and in 2014, to help offset shocks in fuel prices. Beneficiarie s receive the equivalent of 
approximately $100 over the course of one year (World Bank 2012). For Peru, we focus on the 
Juntos program, which is a conditional cash transfer to mothers designed to subsidize child health 
and education. Beneficiary households receive a monthly transfer of 100 soles (approximately 
$30). Both programs target roughly one-third of the population. 
 
Predicting Income with Proxy Measures  
To simulate targeting in the pr ograms, we obtained household-le vel data from the 
Indonesian National Socioeconomic Survey (SUSENAS) and the Peru vian National Household 
Survey (ENAHO), both for the years 2010-2011. Both datasets are  used for targeting in the 
respective countries. Our sample contains 263,705 households in Indonesia and 46,305 households 
in Peru. Both surveys contain the complete set of asset variabl e s  u s e d  i n  t a r g e t i n g ,  a s  w e l l  a  
measure of actual per-capita consumption, so we can use these datasets to examin e targeting 
accuracy. For each country, we randomly divide the observations into equally sized “training” and 
“test” sets. In the training set, we regress monthly household per-capita consumption on the actual 
indicator variables us ed in each country’s  respective proxy-mea ns test formula: 82 variables in 
Indonesia; 72 variables in Peru (regressions provided in the online appendix). We then predict 
monthly per-capita consumption in the test sets using the coefficients from the training regressions, 
and use this “predicted per-capita consumption” for targeting purposes in the simulations below. 
9 
 
The predictors used are not perfect. The typical fit we found o f these regressions (the R2) 
is between 0.53 and 0.66 – so while the regressions have a good  amount of explanatory power, 
they also lead to prediction errors: exclusion errors  of excluding some who should have been 
eligible (with true per-capita consumption below the poverty li ne) and inclusion errors o f  
including some who should not hav e been eligible (with true per -capita consumption above it) – 
akin to Type I and Type II errors in statistics.  
We apply the formula to the other half of our datasets that was not used for estimation (the 
“test” datasets). We can then use the actual per-capita consump tion measure within the survey to 
assess whether the formulas accurately predict a household’s pl ace in the income distribution.  
Figure 3 shows the results, plotting actual per-capita consumpt ion against predicted per-capita 
consumption. The figure shows f our regions: correctly included (bottom-left region), correctly 
excluded (top-right region), incl usion error (top-left region),  and exclusion error (bottom-right 
region). 
For the exposition here, we are simplifying the actual process by which each country 
determines benefit eligibility. In modeling these two programs,  we intend to target households 
below 1.5 times the poverty line in Indonesia (about 33 percent of our sample), and households 
below the poverty line in Peru (about 28 percent of our sample). However, in reality, the monetary 
poverty line varies by year, urban/rural zoning, and province ( in Indonesia) or geographic region 
(in Peru). In Peru, instead of p redicting income directly, the national household targeting system 
(SISFOH) actually produces a numerical index of household poverty using proxy means-testing 
variables; it then also incorporates certain other household circumstances (such as consumption of 
water and electricity) when determining final eligibility. In I ndonesia, the proxy means-testing 
models are estimated separately by region of the country to allow for the fact that how consumption 
of goods predicts income varies across different areas. In both  countries, prediction using proxy-
means tests is used to determine eligibility for various transf er programs, but each individual 
program may edit the list of ultimate beneficiaries. 
 
The Inclusion vs. Exclusion Error Tradeoff 
Our first step is to explore the tradeoffs in the errors of inc lusion and exclusion. One way 
to think about the government’s problem is that by setting different cutoffs for program eligibility 
10 
 
𝑐, the government can choose the balance between the inclusion and exclusion errors that it  makes. 
Figure 3 plots the results with one example 𝑐, but one can see how varying 𝑐 (i.e. shifting the 
vertical line in Figure 3 to the left or to the right) would ch ange the balance of inclusion and 
exclusion error.3 Say that the government aims to assist those who are actually poor. Intuitively, 
not giving out the program to anyone (and setting 𝑐ൌ0 ) means no transfers, and hence very high 
exclusion error, because you are excluding everyone below the poverty line, but it also means no 
inclusion error, since no higher-income people who should not be receiving assistance are getting 
it. In contrast, a universal basic income (setting 𝑐ൌ∞ ) implies no exclusion error since all of the 
poor will get it, but very high inclusion error, because all th e higher-income people are getting 
assistance, too. For values in between, varying the cutoff value 𝑐 allows us to trace out the tradeoffs 
between inclusion error and exclusion error available to the government. 
These tradeoffs can be seen in in Figure 4, Panel A, where we p lot data from the proxy-
means test regressions that we estimated for Indonesia and Peru. We define a poverty level 𝑦∗ for 
each country. We then define exclusion errors as failing to give benefits to those below some actual 
per-capita income 𝑦∗, and inclusion errors as giving benefits to those above per-capita income 𝑦∗. 
These curves, also known as ROC curves, 4 plot inclusion error on the 𝑥-axis and 1 - exclusion 
error on the 𝑦-axis, and trace out the tradeoff between exclusion error and inclusion error obtained 
by varying the cutoff value 𝑐, holding the target actual per capita consumption 𝑦∗ fixed. For 
Indonesia, we plot the ROC curve with 𝑦∗ equal to the 1.5x the government’s poverty line, and for 
Peru, we plot the curve with 𝑦∗ equal to the government’s pove rty line. In the appendix, we 
compare curves setting 𝑦∗ equal to 0.75x the poverty line, which we call the “extreme poor,” 1.0x 
the poverty line, and 1.5x the poverty line, or the “near poor. ” The tradeoff is similar in all three 
cases. 
Panel A of Figure 4 confirms the fundamental tradeoff between i nclusion and exclusion 
error. In both Indonesia and Peru, to reach 80 percent of the intended beneficiaries (exclusion error 
                                                            
3 Note that these definitions of inclusion and exclusion error are with respect to a household’s true poverty status 
(above or below poverty line based on true per-capita consumpti on; that is, holding the horizontal line in Figure 3 
fixed), not with respect to the program design (that is, the eligibility choice 𝑐, shown by the vertical line). 
 
4 ROC stands for “receiver operating characteristic.” It refers to a situation in which there is binary classifier – in 
this case, the proxy-means score combined with different cutoff levels c – and shows the tradeoff between true 
positives from false positives as one varies the cutoff level c.  
11 
 
of 20 percent), the government would need to tolerate an inclusion error of between 22-31 percent. 
Further reductions in exclusion error come at the cost of much higher inclusion error.  
While more sophisticated prediction methods (like more flexible prediction equations, 
machine learning methods, and so on) can improve on these predi ctions (McBride and Nichols 
2016), the fundamental tradeoff be tween inclusion and exclusion  error that we document here 
remains. Also, these graphs ignore the very real problems of incomplete take-up by those who are 
deemed eligible, which could affect both the targeted programs and universal transfers. We will 
revisit this topic below. 
 
Narrowly vs. Widely Targeted Programs with a Fixed Budget 
If the government only cares about making sure the poor have ac cess to transfers of some 
type, a universal basic income – which eliminates exclusion err or entirely – may seem attractive. 
However, as we move to the right in Figure 4, Panel A, by raisi ng the cutoff level 𝑐, more and 
more people become eligible for the transfer. If the total budget for the program is fixed, then the 
transfer given per-person falls as we move to the right on this curve. Therefore, moving to the right 
on the curve not only changes the tradeoff between exclusion error and inclusion error, but holding 
the total program budget fixed, also changes the amount given. 
Figure 4, Panel B, shows this other aspect of the tradeoff, gra phing the level of cash 
transfers disbursed per benefi ciary under Indonesia’s BLT program and Peru’s Juntos program 
under different targeting schemes, as defined by different leve ls of the cutoff income 𝑐. The 
transfer level to eligible households steeply falls as you allo w more people into the program. 
Again, the universal basic incom e can be thought of as the righ tmost extreme point, with zero 
exclusion error and the smallest per-capita transfer for a given budget.  
One argument for a universal basic income is that you can save on the administrative costs 
of targeting, because you do not need to do the periodic targeting census. To capture this, in Figure 
4, Panel B we add back in the costs of targeting for the UBI, s o the benefits per-capita ticks up 
very slightly at the universal basic income point ( 𝑐ൌ∞ ሻ. However, the administrative cost of 
targeting is very low relative to the benefits given out: Indonesia spends roughly $42 million every 
three years for updating its Unified DataBase, with annual oper ating costs of about $1.1 million 
12 
 
(for further information, see Bah, Nazara, and Satriawan 2015). Peru spends roughly $10.8 million 
every three years with annual operating costs of about $1.1 million (Peru MEF 2008). Per year, 
this translates to an additional 0.8 and 1.7 percent of the ove rall transfer budget in Indonesia and 
Peru, respectively. Thus, administrative costs are not a large driver of benefits level, especially in 
comparison to the level of inclusion error one chooses, which i s why the discontinuity at the 
universal basic income point is barely visible in Figure 4, Panel B.  
 
Welfare Comparisons 
For a given total budget, which point on the graph is “best” depends on various social 
welfare weights. For example, it is necessary to put a weight on inclusion errors, while 
remembering that just because someone is not below the cutoff line does not imply that the social 
value of them receiving a transfer is zero – indeed, genericall y such a transfer still has a positive 
value. It is necessary to put a w eight on exclusion errors: how costly is it to the government for 
some deserving people not to obtain the transfer, merely because of errors in the targeting formula? 
It is necessary to put a weight on the implied reduction in per -capita transfer to the very poorest 
that is required to accommodate the increased number of beneficiaries. It is also necessary to take 
a stand on how much more the poor value a given dollar than the  rich (i.e., the difference in 
marginal utilities for poor and rich), which is given by the curvature on the utility function. For a 
given amount of targeting, one can then determine the per-capita transfer. 
Deciding how to parse the tradeoffs between inclusion error, exclusion error, and per-capita 
benefits requires specifying a social welfare function that all ows the government to evaluate the 
social benefits from these different decision rules, while hold ing the overall size of the transfer 
constant. Here, we will evaluate the total social welfare using  what is commonly known as a 
constant relative risk-aversion utility function: 
𝑈 ൌ ∑ሺ𝑦௜ ൅𝑏 ௜ሻଵିఘ
1െ𝜌  
where 𝑦௜ is household 𝑖’s pre-tax per-capita income, 𝑏௜ is the per-capita benefits assigned to 
household 𝑖, and 𝜌 is a coefficient of relative risk-aversion, where higher value s of 𝜌 put higher 
weights on transfers received by the very poor. By comparing th e sum of 𝑈 for different 
13 
 
configurations of benefits, one can see which scheme produces t he highest net social welfare 
judged by this metric. 
 Of course, conclusions will depend on the particular value of 𝜌 one chooses. Here, we 
calculate the social welfare from  programs with different level s of targeting in Figure 5 for each 
country for a particular value of 𝜌ൌ3 . (As a robustness check, we also calculated social welfare 
with 𝜌ൌ1  and 𝜌ൌ5 , and the conclusions are qualitatively similar.) Specifically, in Figure 5, we 
plot social welfare evaluated ag ainst the amount of inclusion e rror for a fixed budget B, for both 
countries. As before, social welfare will increase discontinuously for the universal basic income 
because no targeting costs are incurred in this program.   
The key finding from this graph is that narrowly targeted progr ams – those focused on 
distributing large benefits-per-capita to the poorest of the po or – appear to achieve much higher 
utility levels than less narrowly targeted programs, including but not limited to a universal basic 
income. In Indonesia, the socially optimal program calculated in this way targets about 19 percent 
of the population, with inclusion error of 7.4 percent and exclusion error of 58.2 percent; for Peru, 
the socially optimal program targets approximately 18 percent o f the population, with inclusion 
error of 6.4 percent and exclusion error of 52.4 percent. 
Even programs that appear somewhat badly targeted could still dominate a universal basic 
income. To understand where the programs in Indonesia and Peru fall in terms of social welfare, 
we can see where the current level of inclusion error roughly falls. Bah, Bazzi, Sumarto, and Tobias 
(2014) calculate that inclusion error in the 2008 Indonesian BLT program was roughly 34 percent, 
which is higher than the social optimum, but still substantiall y more narrowly targeted than a 
universal basic income. Peru’s Juntos is at roughly 6.4 percent inclusion error, according to Robles, 
Rubio, and Stampini (2015), sugge sting that the rate of inclusi o n  e r r o r  i s  c l o s e  t o  t h e  s o c i a l  
optimum as calculated here.   
In short, this analysis illustrates that targeting could be an effective mechanism in 
improving overall social welfare, even with high levels of targeting error. However, note that this 
discussion focuses only on tradeoffs involved in choosing whether to target transfers based on one 
survey – that is, how to identify the poor in the static situat ion of a given point in time. In reality, 
income status varies over time. Thus, the size of the relative errors will also depend on how 
frequently the government collects asset data from households and how much churn in and out of 
14 
 
poverty occurs over time. Because targeting surveys are infrequent, actual targeting errors may be 
higher than what we report here, and so one may want to account for this factor in determining 
where to place the cutoff. 
 
Other Challenges with Targeted Transfers 
In choosing between a broader approach like a universal basic income and a more narrowly 
targeted approach, several othe r important considerations arise  in addition to inclusion and 
exclusion errors. We consider four issues: breadth of political  support, horizontal equity, 
transparency, and labor market distortions. 
First, we have focused on the case where the government has a f ixed budget available for 
the transfer program. However, political support for redistribution may be much higher if everyone 
gets a “piece of the pie” (Gelbach and Pritchett 2002). Thus, as inclusion error increases, the overall 
amount of funding available for transfers may increase. As the elasticity between the total budget 
and the number of beneficiaries increases, universal transfers become more attractive (Klasen and 
Lange 2016).   
Second, the principle of horizontal equity holds that each person who has the same relevant 
conditions should be treated the same. Transfer programs using proxy-means tests will have errors 
in the prediction algorithm – and so they do not treat all peop le with the same utility of receiving 
the benefits identically. For programs where the income cutoff for providing benefits is near-zero, 
horizontal equity violations are (mechanically) close to zero, because almost no households receive 
the program. Violations of horizontal equity are also mechanically zero for universal basic income: 
by definition, if all households receive the transfer, then all households are treated the same.  
Using our data and simulations for Peru and Indonesia, we looke d at all households that 
were included in the program at a given cutoff level of predict ed income, and then calculated the 
percentage of households 5 percentiles above or below that were also included; for households that 
were excluded, we calculated the percentage of households 5 percentiles above or below that were 
also excluded. At each cutoff point, we average these percentag es over all households. Figure 6 
shows the resulting measure of horizontal equity and how it var ies as we vary the cutoff 𝑐, and 
hence the inclusion error, of the program. We find that for cut off levels in an intermediate range, 
15 
 
in which inclusion errors were roughly 30-40 percent, it is common to find that horizontal equity 
is violated about 20 percent of the time. In addition to the un fairness they represent, violations of 
horizontal equity can also lead to significant political problems. 
A third important consideration involves the logistics of imple menting targeting schemes 
in a low-capacity (and potential ly corruption-prone) environmen t. A proxy-means test has an 
inherent lack of transparency, because eligibility is determined based on a weighted sum of many 
different variables, which would be hard for ordinary citizens to understand even if the weights 
were public information. Moreover, the proxy-means test formula (essentially the weight that the 
coefficients in the regression would give to each asset) are kept secret because if they are known, 
households (perhaps in cooperation with better-informed agents)  may strategically misreport or 
hide assets to make sure they fall under the cutoff. Using data  from Colombia, Camacho and 
Conover (2011) show that over time as the formula became known, there was substantial bunching 
of reporting right below the eligibility cutoff. Given this con cern, governments not only keep the 
formula confidential, but they also tweak the coefficients every few years.   
Thus, it is very difficult for citizens to verify that a proxy-means test scheme is being 
implemented properly. If a local official says to a citizen, “Sorry, you’re not on the list of eligible 
beneficiaries,” villagers have little recourse, because their true eligibility is hard to verify. On the 
other hand, a universal basic income is inherently transparent, in the sense that everyone is entitled 
to a transfer. 
The evidence suggests that greater transparency of the lists of eligible beneficiaries may be 
important to effective implementation of a proxy-means test-bas ed scheme. In Banerjee et al. 
(2018), we and our co-authors worked with the Indonesian govern ment on a randomized 
experiment in which heads of all villages received a list of who was eligible to receive subsidized 
rice, but in a treatment group of villages, the central government also mailed out an “identification 
card” directly to citizens deemed eligible. Mailing identification cards to the beneficiaries resulted 
in treatment villages receiving 26 percent more subsidized rice compared to control villages – and 
reduced “leakage” (rice that, as far as we can tell, was not distributed to anyone) by between 33 
and 58 percent. 
Finally, targeting may introduce distortions. These distortions  can, in theory, reduce the 
quantity of work, either because income effects decrease the incentive to work, or because phasing 
16 
 
out the transfer over some income range decreases the after-tax -and-transfer effective marginal 
wage in that range. To study the income effects, we and our co-authors re-examined seven different 
randomized trials of government-run cash transfer programs thro ughout the developing world 
(Banerjee et al. 2017), which p rovided between 4 and 20 percent  of household consumption to 
beneficiaries for many years. We found no systematic evidence that any of these programs reduced 
labor supply.  
Regarding the second channel – effects that come through changi ng the after-tax-and-
transfer effective marginal wage – a vast literature in develop ed economies has studied the 
alteration in work incentives tha t arises either from the chang es in the income tax rate formula 
needed to raise the revenue to pay for the transfer, or from the effective marginal tax rate imposed 
by the phase-out of the transfers. In the US context, for examp le, the earned-income tax credit 
provides a negative marginal income tax rate at the very bottom  of the tax schedule (thus 
subsidizing work), and was designed with these concerns in mind, given that there is evidence in 
the United States that labor supply elasticities are higher on the extensive margin (working at all 
vs. staying out of the labor force) than on the intensive margin (how much you work) (for example, 
Eissa and Leibman 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001; Saez 2002). Relatedly, a major goal of the 
1996 US welfare reform was to redesign the welfare system to reduce very high marginal tax rates 
that came from rapid phase-outs of benefits in certain income t ax ranges. As discussed above, a 
universal basic income program does not eliminate this issue en tirely, although the relevant 
distortions to think about for a universal basic income are the  increases in marginal income tax 
rates required to finance the universal basic income. 
These issues are related, but somewhat different, to what happens with a proxy-means test 
in a developing economy. In this setting, the labor supply dist ortion will involve the implied tax 
rates from the phase-out of the program for those who are eligible, but will also be smoothed out 
by the error rate in the formula for those who have equivalent income (or consumption) but are not 
designated as eligible by the formula.
5 Perhaps ironically, a more accurate proxy-means test 
                                                            
5 To see this, recall that for each income level 𝑦, one can think of the proxy-means test as producing a probability of 
receiving the benefit 𝑝ሺ𝑦ሻ. The fact that the proxy-means test has predictive power implies that 𝑝 will be decreasing 
with income (𝑝ᇱሺ𝑦ሻ ൏0 ), but the fact that there are inclusion and exclusion errors means that 𝑝ሺ𝑦ሻ is continuous. 
Abstracting away from the rest of the tax system, one can then write a household’s expected after-tax income as 
𝛼ሺ𝑦ሻ ൌ𝑦൅𝑝 ሺ𝑦ሻ𝑏. One can therefore think of the “expected tax rate” imposed by the proxy-means test system as 
െ𝑝ᇱሺ𝑦ሻ𝑏. 
17 
 
formula, with fewer errors, may actually induce more labor supply distortions, since fewer errors 
in the proxy-means formula will imply that that some households face a steeper effective tax rate 
over some range. More noise in the proxy-means test formula, ma king the proxy-means formula 
less predictive, tends to smooth out the phase-out region, and will thus tend to reduce the implicit 
tax rate that a population faces from a targeted benefit.   
For example, Figure 7 illustrates the implied marginal tax rate s from actual proxy-means 
test formulas and from a counterfactual formula where we double the amount of noise, making the 
proxy-means test less predictive than it is in practice. As the figures show, doubling the amount of 
noise in the proxy-means test formula reduces the implied margi nal tax rate for the poor, but it 
increases the implied marginal tax rate somewhat for the middle-class, who face some probability 
of receiving the benefits (due to inclusion error) that is decl ining in their income. If households 
are aware that increasing their income or consumption may reduce their chances of being eligible 
for benefits, they may reduce their labor supply accordingly, though documenting to what extent 
this happens empirically remains an important direction for future research. 
The proxy-means test puts partic ularly heavy weight on certain assets. While the precise 
proxy-means test formula may not be known, households do observe which variables the 
government asks about – that is, they know that the poverty cen sus asks about televisions, 
refrigerators, and so on. The potential for linkage from owners hip of such assets to reduced 
eligibility for benefits puts a particularly high implicit tax rate on these particular assets, which 
could lead households to reduce their consumption of these assets. For example, from 1696 to 
1851, Britain imposed a tax on windows, which were easily obser vable to the taxman – but this 
led to the construction of buildings with very few windows, low light, and poor ventilation (Glantz 
2008; Oates and Schwab 2015). It is not clear that households understand the formula in a proxy-
means test enough to distort their purchases of assets, and we are currently studying this question 
in cooperation with the government of Indonesia.  
 
Alternative Methods of Targeting 
Our discussion has assumed that the government produces an elig ibility list for targeted 
transfers through a proxy-means test based on household-level d ata. However, we now consider 
18 
 
two other methods of targeting: community-based targeting and a  system that imposes costs and 
lets people assist in targeting themselves. We also consider ho w conditional cash transfer 
programs, popular throughout the developing world, can be thought of in relation to the targeting 
challenge. 
 
Community-Based Targeting 
In a community-based targeting process, a fixed number of progr am slots are allocated to 
a given community, such as a hamlet (a part of a village). The hamlet, through a participatory 
meeting of some type, decides who among them is most in need of the transfer.  
One might think that such a system would be unpopular: after al l, who wants to discuss 
their income in front of their neighbors and peers? (Not Americ ans, as discussed in Card et al. 
2012!) In addition, one might fear that such a system is prone to elite capture: for example, a 
powerful headman might manipulate the meeting to put his nephew  on the list of beneficiaries. 
However, when we and our co-authors tried such an approach experimentally in Indonesia and 
compared it experimentally, we found that citizens vastly preferred the community based-approach 
to a data-based proxy-means test. In addition, the community approach did a much better job of 
identifying those households who self-assessed themselves to be poor, and was only slightly worse 
at identifying the poor based on per-capita consumption levels.  Furthermore, there was no 
detectable elite capture (Alatas et al. 2012). 
A community targeting approach avoids some key pitfalls of the proxy-means test related 
to transparency and horizontal e quity. The process for allocati ng beneficiaries under the 
community approach was completely public and transparent – unli ke the proxy-means test that 
relies on secret formulas to produce a list of eligible and ineligible households that villagers do not 
really understand. It also addresses the perception of a horizo n t a l  e q u i t y  p r o b l e m  –  f r o m  t h e  
perspective of the villagers, if it is broadly agreed that person A is poorer than person B, they can 
ensure that person A receives the transfer.  
Community targeting also has the potential to be less distortionary. In Alatas et al. (2012), 
we showed that communities appear  to target based on earning potential, rather than actual 
earnings. For example, widows – who have lower earning potential than households headed by 
19 
 
men – appear to be more likely to be ranked as poor, even conditional on their actual income level. 
The same is true for education:  those with high education, and hence high earning power, are 
ranked as wealthier than their actual income alone would imply.  To the extent that  communities 
target based on earning potential rather than actual income, such a system has the potential to b e 
less distortionary not only than a proxy-means test, but also than a regular income tax.  
Community targeting has important limitations – in particular, it does not readily allow for 
comparisons across locations, and if implemented at scale, could lead households t o take actions 
to hide their income from their neighbors. But its potential ad vantages may mean that it is worth 
wider consideration as part of the targeting toolkit.  
 
Differential Costs of Take-Up and Self-Targeting  
A substantial fraction of households who are eligible for a government benefit program do 
not enroll in the program. Moffitt (2003) and Currie (2006a) summarize an extensive US-based 
literature studying the reasons for incomplete take-up, including the stigma of receiving benefits, 
incomplete information, and both the psychic and real costs of applying for programs. 
A universal basic income may reduce the take-up problem, because the government can in 
theory send the checks to everyone automatically. This is, of course, easier said than done. Currie 
(2006b) shows that take-up is incomplete even in programs with universal eligibility in the United 
States, and a developing country setting raises additional issu es. For example, the government 
would need to have a list of every individual, without duplications. Most developing countries do 
not have such lists, although India has been working over the past decade to issue a unique, 
unduplicated and biometrically authenticated identity number through the Aadhaar program to 
each of its more than 1 billion citizens. Even with such a list , a country would need a way of 
automatically delivering the tran sfer. In most developing count ry contexts, most people do not 
have an address, let alone a bank account, so the idea of “mail ing a check to the address on file” 
would not work. This suggests that even if enrollment is in the ory automatic, in practice some 
take-up decisions and enrollment actions will need to occur.  
However, having some type of costly take-up can also provide a benefit by helping in the 
targeting of a program. If the cost/benefit of taking up a program is higher for the rich than for the 
20 
 
poor, the poor may be more likely to take up the program. This idea – that having an “ordeal” 
associated with receiving a program can improve the ability to screen among rich and poor – was 
developed by Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982), and further studied  in the context of take-up 
decisions by Kleven and Kopczuk (2011). A key result is that on e may want to offer a transfer 
program to all takers, but with the catch that signing up for t h e  p r o g r a m  e n t a i l s  a  c o s t  t h a t  i s  
differentially costly for the rich.  
Workfare programs, such as those offered by the US Works Progress Administration in the 
1930s and through the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act ( NREGA) in India today, 
operate on this principle. In the NREGA program, for example, any Indian in a rural area is entitled 
to 100 days of work at the official minimum wage, and currently about 180 million people per year 
are employed through the program, making it one of the largest (if not the largest) anti-poverty 
programs in the world today. This is a universal entitlement – there is no poverty screening, and 
there is a guarantee to everyone who wants the work. On the other hand, people with better job 
options tend to prefer doing something other than performing manual labor for minimum wage in 
the hot sun. Whether these types of programs – universal in nature, but achieving screening through 
so-called ordeal mechanisms – are better or worse than a universal basic income program depends 
on whether the substantial utility costs imposed on beneficiaries (like manual labor in the hot sun 
in order to receive benefits) are outweighed by the cost savings from improved targeting. 
However, it may be possible to obtain many of the benefits from self-selection with much 
smaller utility costs to recipients if one marries self-selection to a proxy-means test. In Alatas et al 
(2016), we and our co-authors study what happens when, instead of having the government come 
to everyone’s house and conduct the poverty census automaticall y, households instead have to 
come and apply for the program, at which point they are screene d using the proxy-means test.
6 
Some fraction of households who pass the in-person eligibility test have their eligibility verified 
via a home visit, but this allows the government to skip the home visits for those not eligible and 
to check the eligible at home probabilistically, saving substan tial costs. The proxy-means test is 
the same – what differs is the take-up step. Compared to manual  labor in the sun, the cost of 
applying is relatively small – a bout three hours total in our c ontext – and pales in comparison to 
                                                            
6 Both the automatic door-to-door approach and the application-based approach are used in other contexts. For 
example, Colombia uses an automatic enrollment door-to-door proxy-means test; Costa Rica and Chile use 
application-based proxy-means tests; and both Mexico and Brazil use different approaches in different contexts.  
21 
 
the potential benefits, which average about $150 per year for six years in the context we studied. 
Yet, despite the relatively small costs, we show that self-selection yielded substantially improved 
screening; the beneficiaries selected by the application-based method were about 20 percent poorer 
than those selected through automatic enrollment. 
The key seems to be that the application process substantially reduces the inclusion errors 
in the proxy-means test process, while holding the official eli gibility cutoff 𝑐 fixed. A relatively 
well-off household forecasts correctly that the probability they pass the proxy-means test is small, 
and hence even the relatively small application cost can be eno ugh to discourage them from 
applying. Since there are so many more relatively well-off households than very poor households, 
inducing these households to self -select out can actually lead to a substantial improvement in 
program targeting. This logic sugg ests that the benefits from a dding self-selection to a proxy-
means test system may be largest when the non-target population  is large relative to the target 
population. Moreover, an additional benefit is that some of the poorest households may live at the 
very margins of society and therefore be off the government’s radar screen, and may be missed by 
enumerators trying to do the universal door-to-door screen. When beneficiaries can come to apply, 
such households can make themselves known.  
However, application processes ne ed not necessarily always impr ove targeting. For 
example, a complicated application form may dissuade those who are less literate or comfortable 
with bureaucracy from filling it out, leading to worse targeting (Gupta 2017). The degree to which 
these approaches can improve social welfare depend on whether the selection they induce enables 
the government to improve the efficiency with which it can deli ver assistance to those who need 
it most, and also on the extent to which the efficiency gains achieved thereby are sufficiently large 
(and hence can translate into larger benefits) to offset the costs they impose on beneficiaries. 
  
Conditional Transfers 
A number of transfer programs in developing countries have expl icit conditions that 
beneficiaries must meet in order to receive assistance. For exa mple, one of the first of these 
programs, Mexico’s Prospera program (originally called Progresa), gives cash transfers to poor 
households (screened via a proxy-means test) who also meet basi c maternal and child health and 
22 
 
education conditions, including regular pre- and post-natal car e, regular growth monitoring, 
immunizations, school enrollment, and school attendance. Condit ional cash transfer programs 
have spread throughout the world, and now are present in more than 63 countries reaching tens of 
millions of households annually (Bastagli et al. 2016).  
A number of randomized trials of these programs, including the original launch of 
Progresa, showed that these programs led to substantial improvements on  the conditioned 
indicators, both initially (for example, see Behrman and Todd 1999; Gertler 2004) and over the 
medium term (Behrman, Parker, and Todd 2011; Barham, Macours, a nd Maluccio 2017; Kugler 
and Rojas 2018; Cahyadi et al. 2018). These conditions also may  help make the programs more 
politically palatable, since vot ers in many countries may prefe r that individuals do something in 
return for receiving aid. 
While much attention has been giv en to the incentive effects of  the health and education 
conditions, they can also have targeting effects. In particular, if some very poor households are 
unable to meet the conditions, and if the conditions are actual ly enforced (which they are not 
always), then some very poor households may be excluded from th e programs. Baird, McIntosh, 
and Özler (2011) studied this issue, randomly comparing uncondi tional and conditional transfer 
programs in Malawi. While they found that the conditions increased school enrollments, they noted 
that the unconditional program actually had a larger effect on reducing teen pregnancy. The reason 
was that the unconditional program (unlike the conditional prog ram) still provided cash transfers 
to girls who dropped out of school anyway and were at the highest risk of pregnancy, and the cash 
transfers reduced the likelihood of early pregnancy for these girls. 
While in principle conditional cash transfers could be either universal (anyone who meets 
the education and health conditions receives the transfer) or t argeted using a proxy-means test, 
almost all are targeted, most often using proxy-means tests (Fi szbein and Schady 2009). One 
reason for this is that, in general, richer households are like ly to meet the health and education 
conditions than the poor. Thus, in the absence of explicit addi tional restrictions limiting these 
programs to the poor, that fact that the conditions are more li kely to be fulfilled by wealthier 
households would actually make a universal version of these pro grams regressive rather than 
progressive.  
 
23 
 
Summing Up 
Government-led anti-poverty programs have a crucial role to pla y in helping to eliminate 
extreme poverty worldwide. However, important questions remain about the form of these 
transfers, and in particular, whether they should be universal or targeted more narrowly to the poor. 
While some government programs are universal, such as publicly-funded primary schools that are 
free to the families using them, most cash transfer programs today involve some type of targeting 
mechanism. 
In this paper, we explore how to think about this tradeoff in d eveloping countries, where 
incomes are unobserved for very large portions of the population. In this setting, universal transfers 
cannot be easily taxed back as one moves up the income distribution. As a result, universal transfer 
programs will give out the same net transfer quite high up the income distribution – and therefore 
the tradeoff between a universal basic income program and transfers targeted through other means 
implies a very substantial tradeoff between eliminating exclusi on error and giving much smaller 
transfers on a per-beneficiary basis.  
Our evidence from Indonesia and Peru shows that existing targeting methods in developing 
countries, while imperfect, appear to deliver substantial impro vements in welfare compared to 
universal programs, because they can transfer much more on a per-beneficiary basis to the poor as 
compared with universal programs. The primary downside of these programs is horizontal equity 
– because targeting is imperfect, there will be a substantial n umber of poor households who slip 
through cracks and are excluded. Nevertheless, for many develop ing countries, our simulations 
suggest the welfare gains from targeting may be substantial. 
  
24 
 
 
References 
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Ririn Purnamasari, and Matthew 
Wai-Poi. 2016. “Self-Targeting: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” Journal 
of Political Economy, 124(2): 371-427. 
 
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia Tobias. 2012. 
“Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” American Economic 
Review, 102(4): 1206-1240.  
 
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler. 2011. “Cash or Co ndition? Evidence from a Cash 
Transfer Experiment.”  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1709-1753. 
 
Bah, Adama, Samuel Bazzi, Sudarno Sumarto, and Julia Tobias. 20 14. “Finding the Poor vs. 
Measuring Their Poverty: Exploring the Drivers of Targeting Effectiveness in Indonesia.” 
TNP2K Working Paper. 
 
Bah, Adama, Suahasil Nazara, and Elan Satriawan. 2015. “Indonesia’s Single Registry for Social 
Protection Programmes.” International Policy Centre for Inclusi ve Growth research brief 
no. 49.  
 
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Jordan Kyle, Benjamin A. Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto. 2018. 
“Tangible Information and Citizen Empowerment: Identification Cards and Food Subsidy 
Programs in Indonesia.” Journal of Political Economy 126(2): 451-491. 
 
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2017. “Debunking the 
Stereotype of the Lazy Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash Tr ansfer Programs 
Worldwide,” World Bank Research Observer, 31 (1): 155-185. 
 
Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, a nd John Maluccio. 2017. “Are Con ditional Cash Transfers 
Fulfilling Their Promise? Schooling, Learning, and Earnings aft er 10 Years.” CEPR 
Discussion Paper DP11937. 
 
Bastagli, Francesca, Jessica Hagen-Zanker, Luke Harman, Valentina Barca, Georgina Sturge, and 
Tanja Schmidt. 2016. “Cash Transfers: What Does the Evidence Sa y?” Overseas 
Development Institute Report. 
 
Behrman, Jere R., and Petra E. Todd. 1999. “Randomness in the E xperimental Samples of 
PROGRESA—Education, Health, and Nutrition Program.” IFPRI Discussion Paper. 
 
Behrman, Jere R., Susan Parker, and Petra Todd. 2011. “Do Condi tional Cash Transfers for 
Schooling Generate Lasting Benef its?: A Five-Year Follow-up of 
PROGRESA/Oportunidades.” Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 93-122.  
 
25 
 
Besley, Timothy. 1990. “Means Testing Versus Universal Provisio n in Poverty Alleviation 
Programmes.” Economica, 57(225): 119-129. 
 
Cahyadi, Nur, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Rizal Adi Prima, Elan Satriawan, and Ekki 
Syamsulhakim. 2018. “Cumulative Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs: 
Experimental Evidence from Indonesia.” Working Paper.  
 
Camacho, Adriana, and Emily Conover. 2011. “Manipulation of Soc ial Program Eligibility.” 
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3: 41-65. 
 
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Inequality at Work: 
The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction.” American Economic Review , 102(6): 
2981-3003. 
 
Chetty, Raj, and Adam Looney. 2006. “Consumption Smoothing and the Welfare Consequences 
of Social Insurance in Developing Economies.” Journal of Public Economics, 90: 2351-
2356. 
 
Currie, Janet. 2006a. The Invisible Safety Net: Protectin g the Nation’s Poor Children and 
Families. Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
 
Currie Janet. 2006b. "The Take-up of Social Benefits," in Alan Auerbach, David Card, and John 
Quigley (eds). Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, (New York: Russell 
Sage). 80-148. 
 
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Li ebman. 1996. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax 
Credit.”  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 605–637.  
 
Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady, with Francisco H.G. Ferreira, Margaret Grosh, Niall Keleher, 
Pedro Olinto, and Emmanuel Skouf ias. 2009. “Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing 
Present And Future Poverty.” World Bank Policy Research Report.  
 
Gelbach, Jonah B., and Lant Pritchett. 2002. “Is More for the Poor Less for the Poor? The Politics 
of Means-Tested Targeting.” Topics in Economic Analysis & Policy, 2(1).  
 
Gertler, Paul. 2004. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Chi ld Health? Evidence from 
PROGRESA's Control Randomized Experiment.” American Economic Review 94(2): 336-
341. 
 
Glantz, Andrew. 2008. “A Tax on Light and Air: Impact of the Window Duty on Tax 
Administration and Architecture, 1696-1851.” Penn History Review, 15(2): 1-23. 
 
Golan, Jennifer, Terry Sicular, and Nithin Umapathi. 2017. “Unconditional Cash Transfers in 
China: Who Benefits from the Rural Minimum Living Standard Guar antee (Dibao) 
Program?” World Development, 93: 316-336. 
 
26 
 
Gupta, Sarika. 2017. “Perils of the Paperwork: The Impact of In formation and Application 
Assistance on Welfare Program Take-Up in India.” Working Paper. 
 
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2014. “The Missing ‘Mi ssing Middle.’” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 28(3): 89-108. 
 
International Labor Organization. “ILO Social Security Inquiry. ” 
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/ilossi/ssimain.home?p_lang=en.  
 
Jensen, Anders. 2016. “Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax System.” Working 
Paper. 
 
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2008. “The Anatomy of Start-Stop Growth.” Review 
of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 582-587. 
 
Klasen, Stephan and Simon Lange. 2016. “Poverty, Equity and Gro wth in Developing and 
Transition Countries: Statistical  Methods and Empirical Analysi s.” Gottingen Working 
Paper Number 213.  
 
Kleven, Henrik, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2011. “Transfer Program C omplexity and the Take-Up 
of Social Benefits.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3: 54-90. 
 
 
Kleven, Henrik, Claus Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez. 2016. “Why Can Modern Governments Tax 
So Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries.” Economica, 83: 219-246. 
 
McBride, Linden, and Austin Nichols. 2016. “Retooling Poverty Targeting Using Out-of-Sample 
Validation and Machine Learning.” World Bank Economic Review. 
 
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the 
Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 1063–1114. 
 
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas. 2008. “Marco Macroeconómico Multianual 2009-2011.” 
MEF, Lima, Peru. 
 
Mirrlees, James A. 1971. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optim um Income Taxation.” Review 
of Economic Studies, 38(2): 175-208. 
 
Moffitt, Robert A. (ed.). 2003. Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.  
 
Nichols, Albert L., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. “Targeting Transfers through Restrictions on 
Recipients.” American Economic Review, 72(2): 372-377. 
 
Oates, Walace E. and Robert M. Schwab, 2015. “The window tax: a  case study in excess 
burden.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 163-80. 
 
27 
 
Page, Lucy, and Rohini Pande. 2018. “Ending Global Poverty: Why  Money Isn’t Enough.” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming. 
 
Ravallion, Martin. 2009. “How Relevant is Targeting to the Success of an Antipoverty Program? 
A Case Study for China.” World Bank Research Observer, 24(2): 205-231. 
 
Robles, Marcos, Marcela G. Rubio, and Marco Stampini. 2015. “Have Cash Transfers Succeeded 
in Reaching the Poor in Latin America and the Caribbean?” Inter-American Development 
Bank policy brief no. IDB-PB-246. 
 
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intens ive versus Extensive Labor 
Supply Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 1039–1073. 
 
Salehi-Isfahani, Djavad, and Moha mmad H. Mostafavi-Dehzooei. 20 17. “Cash Transfers and 
Labor Supply: Evidence from a Large-Scale Program in Iran.” Economic Research Forum 
Working Paper #1090. 
 
 
Stantcheva, Stefanie. 2014. “Optimal Income Taxation with Adver se Selection in the Labour 
Market.” Review of Economic Studies, 81: 1296-1329. 
 
World Bank. 2012. “Bantuan Langsung Tunai (BLT) temporary uncon ditional cash transfer.”  
Social assistance program and public expenditure review no. 2. 
 
World Bank. 2014. “The State of Social Safety Nets 2014.” 
 
World Bank. 2018. “World Development Indicators.” 
  
  
28 
 
 
Figure 1: Example of Progressive Post-Tax Income Schedules With and Without a Universal 
Basic Income  
  
 
Figure 2: Example of Post-Tax Income Schedules with and Without a  U n i v e r s a l  B a s i c  
Income, With a Tax-Exempt Region 
 
  
 
 
45° line 
Pre‐tax income 
UBI 
Post‐tax income 
𝛼ሺ𝑦ሻ with no UBI 
𝛼ሺ𝑦ሻ with UBI 
Tax‐exempt region 
Pre‐tax income 
UBI 
Post‐tax income  𝛼ሺ𝑦ሻ with no UBI 
𝛼ሺ𝑦ሻ with UBI 
29 
 
 
Figure 3: Predicted vs. actual per-capita consumption in test set data 
     
Notes: The figures above plot actual log per-capita monthly consumpt ion against predicted log per-capital monthly 
consumption for both Indonesia and Peru. The solid vertical and  horizontal lines represent eligibility cutoffs for the 
programs we model here. (In Indonesia, we set the cutoff approximately at the 33rd percentile for consumption; and in 
Peru, we set the cutoff at the 28 th percentile.) The dashed line is a 45˚ line. For legibility, the points plotted above 
represent a random sample of 10 percent of our full data from Indonesia and 50 percent of our full data from Peru. 
 
  

30 
 
Figure 4:  Tradeoffs between inclusion error and exclusion error by varying eligibility 
cutoff 
Panel A: ROC Curves for Program Targeting 
 
Panel B: Benefits per Household vs. Inclusion Error for Different Eligibility Cutoffs 𝑐 
 
Notes: Panel A plots the ROC curves for both Peru and Indonesia, usi ng a target consumption value equal to the 
government poverty line in Peru and 1.5x the government poverty line in Indonesia. Panel B traces the per-household 
benefit amount as inclusion error increases, assuming a fixed transfer budget of approximately $1.83 billion per year 
in Indonesia and $274 million per year in Peru (modeled after the sizes of BLT and Juntos, respectively). We include 
cost-savings from administrative targeting at the universal basic income point (inclusion error = 1). 

31 
 
 
Figure 5:  Social Welfare vs. Inclusion Error 
 
 
Notes: Figure 5 uses the same pooled household data as in Figure 4. For each cutoff value c, we calculate the per-
capita benefit amount for included households, and then calcula te constant relative risk-aversion utility using the 
formula noted above. If a household is not included in the program at a given value of c, we simply set bi = 0. Dashed 
lines indicate the point of maximum social welfare in each country. 
  

32 
 
 
Figure 6: Horizontal Equity vs. Inclusion Error 
 
 
 
Notes: Figure 6 traces horizontal equity as a function of inclusion error. At each cutoff c, we calculate, for each 
household, the percentage of households within ±5 income percentiles (based on actual income) that received the same 
benefit status – included or excluded – based on the results of proxy-means test prediction. In other words, for 
households that were included in the program at a given c, we calculate the percentage of similar households that were 
also included; for households that were excluded, we calculate the percentage of similar households that were also 
excluded. At each cutoff point, w e average these percentages ov er all households to compute the horizontal equity 
variable graphed above. Dashed lines indicate the location and value of minimum horizontal equity.  
  

33 
 
 
Figure 7: Implied Tax Rate vs. Household Income 
   
Notes: Figure 7 plots the implied tax rate against actual per-capita  household consumption for both Indonesia and 
Peru. We designated households as benefit recipients if predicted income was less than 1.5x the poverty line (in 
Indonesia) or less than 1x the poverty line (in Peru). Households above the 95th income percentile were dropped from 
both country samples. We then performed a local polynomial regr ession of benefit receipt status on actual income, 
using a bandwidth of 50,000 rupiah (Indonesia) and 75 soles (Peru). We took the first derivative of this function and 
multiplied it by (minus) the benefit amount in order to calculate the implied tax rate as a function of household income 
(െ𝑝ᇱሺ𝑦ሻ𝑏). We then applied the same process after adding a random, normally distributed noise term (with the same 
standard deviation as our original predicted incomes) to these predicted income values.